Austrofaschismus
     
	
    
    

	
	
		
Hinweis:
		
Das ist ein alter
			- nicht mehr gewarteter - Artikel des AEIOU.
		

			Im Austria-Forum finden Sie
			eine aktuelle
				Version dieses Artikels im neuen AEIOU.
		
		

			https://austria-forum.org Impressum
		
	



  

   
   
   
   
  
  

    
   
  
  

    
    
    
  
  

    
      
   
     
  
  

    
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
   
   
  


  





 A
 B
 C
 D
 E
 F
 G
 H
 I
 J
 K
 L
 M
 N
 O
 P
 Q
 R
 S
 T
 U
 V
 W
 X
 Y
 Z
 
  







Austrofaschismus





© Copyright

Austrofascism: Demonstration of the Vaterländische Jugend (Österreichisches Jungvolk) in Tulln 1934. Left: K. Schuschnigg in the uniform of the Ostmärkische Sturmscharen. Right: Federal Chancellor E. Dollfuß.




Austro-Fascism, term for the system of government established in Austria in 1933/1934, developed and supported by the circles around the Heimwehr para-military force and young Christian Socialist politicians. Influenced by the Mussolini's fascism in Italy and backed by political Catholicism and the theories of O. Spann, Austro-Fascism replaced the democratic constitution and parlamentarianism with an authoritarian system. The Korneuburger Programm of June 18, 1930 was the first document to describe Austro-Fascism, and from March 1933 until February 1934 Federal Chancellor E. Dollfuß pursued this authoritarian course against Social Democrats, completing it with the constitution of May 1, 1934. Until 1938 the Corporate State was largely characterised by Austro-Fascism. The term was originally coined by its opponents, mainly Social Democrats, but it also found its way into academic discourse.





Further reading: E. Tálos and W. Neugebauer (eds.), Austrofaschismus, Beiträge über Politik, Ökonomie und Kultur 1934-38, 41988; L. O. Meysels, Der Austrofaschismus, 1992.



        



 











		

		
		Hinweise zum Lexikon  Abkürzungen im Lexikon
		
		



   





  
© Copyright Österreich-Lexikon

 

  

  



				
Suche nach hierher verweisenden Seiten 



  
      
      
        
        
        
        
      












    
    
    