



Francisco Franco - Wikipedia






























Jump to content

	
		
			
				

	
	

Main menu
	
	


				
		

	
	Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Navigation
	
	
		
		
			
			
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
		
		
	


	

	
		Contribute
	
	
		
		
			
			
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Special pages
		
		
	




				

	


		
			

	
	
		
		
	


		
		
			

	

Search
	
	
		
			
				
					
						
						
					
					
				
				Search
			
		
	


			
	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	
		

	
	

Appearance
	
	


			
				
			
		
	


	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
Donate


Create account


Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	

	
	

Personal tools
	
	


		

	
		
		
			


Donate




Create account




Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	




		
	


	
		
			
		
		
			
		
			
				
				
				
		
		
	
	
				
					
					
	
	
Contents
	move to sidebar
	hide



	
		

			
				(Top)
			
		
		

		
			
				1
				Early life
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				2
				Military career
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Military career subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					2.1
					Rif War and advancement through the ranks
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					2.2
					During the Second Spanish Republic
				
			
			
			
				

			
				
					2.2.1
					1936 general election
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
		
	
	
	

		
			
				3
				From the Spanish Civil War to World War II
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle From the Spanish Civil War to World War II subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					3.1
					First months
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					3.2
					Rise to power
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					3.3
					Military command
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					3.4
					Political command
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					3.5
					End of the Civil War
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					3.6
					World War II
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					3.7
					Jews and anti-Semitism
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				4
				Francoist Spain
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Francoist Spain subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					4.1
					Francoism and fascism
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					4.2
					Political repression
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					4.3
					Spanish colonies and decolonisation
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					4.4
					Economic policy
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				5
				Succession
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				6
				Death and funeral
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Death and funeral subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					6.1
					Exhumation and reburial
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				7
				Legacy
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				8
				In popular media
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle In popular media subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					8.1
					Cinema and television
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					8.2
					Music
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					8.3
					Literature
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				9
				Honours and arms
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				10
				See also
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				11
				Notes
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				12
				References
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle References subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					12.1
					Citations
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					12.2
					Sources
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				13
				Further reading
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Further reading subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					13.1
					Primary sources
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				14
				External links
			
		
		
		
		
	



					
		
			
		
		
			
				
					
						

	
	

Toggle the table of contents
	
	


							
			
		
	


					
					Francisco Franco
			

	
	

117 languages
	
	

		
			
			
				
				
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
Aragonés
Ænglisc
العربية
الدارجة
مصرى
Asturianu
Azərbaycanca
تۆرکجه
Bikol Central
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
Беларуская
Български
বাংলা
Brezhoneg
Bosanski
Буряад
Català
کوردی
Čeština
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Esperanto
Español
Eesti
Euskara
Estremeñu
فارسی
Suomi
Võro
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
עברית
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Magyar
Հայերեն
Արեւմտահայերէն
Interlingua
Bahasa Indonesia
Ido
Íslenska
Italiano
日本語
Jawa
ქართული
Қазақша
ភាសាខ្មែរ
한국어
Kurdî
Кыргызча
Latina
Ladino
Lëtzebuergesch
Limburgs
Lombard
ລາວ
Lietuvių
Latviešu
Malagasy
Македонски
മലയാളം
Монгол
मराठी
Bahasa Melayu
မြန်မာဘာသာ
مازِرونی
नेपाली
Nederlands
Norsk nynorsk
Norsk bokmål
Occitan
Papiamentu
Polski
Piemontèis
پښتو
Português
Runa Simi
Română
Русский
Sardu
Sicilianu
Scots
Davvisámegiella
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Soomaaliga
Shqip
Српски / srpski
Svenska
Kiswahili
தமிழ்
Тоҷикӣ
ไทย
ትግርኛ
Tolışi
Türkçe
Українська
Vèneto
Tiếng Việt
Winaray
吴语
მარგალური
Yorùbá
文言
閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí
粵語
中文
			
			Edit links
		

	


				
					
						
							
								

	
		
		
			
Article


Talk


			
		
		
	


								

	
	English
	
	


					

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


				
	


							
						
						
							
			    

	
		
		
			
Read


View source


View history


			
		
		
	


			

							
								

	
	

Tools
	
	


									
						

	
	Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Actions
	
	
		
		
			


Read




View source




View history


			
		
		
	



	
		General
	
	
		
		
			
			
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Switch to legacy parser
		
		
	



	
		Print/export
	
	
		
		
			
			
Download as PDF
Printable version
		
		
	



	
		In other projects
	
	
		
		
			
			
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikidata item
		
		
	




									
				
	


							
						
					
				
				
					
						
							
				
							
		
						
							
				
	
	Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide





							
		
					
				
				
					
							
		
		

						From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
						
						
					
					
					Dictator of Spain from 1939 to 1975
For other uses, see Francisco Franco (disambiguation).





CaudilloFrancisco Franco
Formal portrait, c. 1960

Caudillo of Spain[a]
In office1 October 1936[b] – 20 November 1975
Prime Minister

Himself

Luis Carrero Blanco

Carlos Arias Navarro


Preceded by

Miguel Cabanellas (as President of the National Defence Junta of the Nationalist side)

Manuel Azaña (as President)


Succeeded by

Alejandro Rodríguez de Valcárcel (acting)

Juan Carlos I (as King)


Prime Minister of Spain[c]
In office30 January 1938[b] – 9 June 1973
DeputyAgustín Muñoz GrandesLuis Carrero Blanco
Preceded by

Francisco Gómez-Jordana[d]

Juan Negrín[7]


Succeeded byLuis Carrero Blanco
National Chief of FET y de las JONS
In office19 April 1937 – 20 November 1975
Deputy
Francisco Gómez-Jordana (1938‍–‍1939)
None (1939–1962)
Agustín Muñoz Grandes (1962‍–‍1967)
Luis Carrero Blanco (1967‍–‍1973)
Preceded byPosition established
Succeeded byCarlos Arias Navarro


Personal details
BornFrancisco Paulino Hermenegildo Teódulo Franco Bahamonde(1892-12-04)4 December 1892Ferrol, Kingdom of Spain
Died20 November 1975(1975-11-20) (aged 82)Madrid, Francoist Spain
Resting place

Valley of the Fallen, Madrid00(1975–2019)

Mingorrubio Cemetery, Madrid00(since 2019)


PartyFET y de las JONS (Movimiento Nacional)
Spouse

Carmen Polo ​(m. 1923)​
ChildrenMaría del Carmen
Relatives

Nicolás Franco (brother)

Ramón Franco (brother)

Francisco Franco (cousin)

Ricardo de la Puente (cousin)


EducationInfantry Academy of Toledo
Signature
Military service
Allegiance

Kingdom of Spain00(1907–1931)

Second Spanish Republic00(1931–1936)

Spanish State00(1936–1975)


BranchSpanish Armed Forces
Service years1907–1975
RankCaptain general



Army

Air Force

Navy Generalissimo

CommandsSpanish Armed Forces (Francoist)
Battles/wars

2nd Melillan Campaign

Rif War (WIA)

Revolution of 1934

Spanish Civil War

Spanish Republican insurgency

Ifni War




Francisco Franco Bahamonde[e][f][g] (4 December 1892 – 20 November 1975) was a Spanish military general and the dictator of Spain from 1939 until his death in 1975. He had led the Nationalist forces in overthrowing the Second Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War from 1936 to 1939. This period in Spanish history, from the Nationalist victory to Franco's death, is commonly known as Francoist Spain.


Born in Ferrol, Galicia, into an upper-class military family, Franco served in the Spanish Army as a cadet in the Toledo Infantry Academy from 1907 to 1910. While serving in Morocco, he rose through the ranks to become a brigadier general in 1926 at age 33. Two years later, Franco became the director of the General Military Academy in Zaragoza. As a conservative and monarchist, Franco regretted the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of the Second Republic in 1931, and was devastated by the closing of his academy; nevertheless, he continued his service in the Republican Army.[10] His career was boosted after the right-wing CEDA and PRR won the 1933 election, empowering him to lead the suppression of the 1934 uprising in Asturias. Franco was briefly elevated to Chief of Army Staff before the 1936 election moved the leftist Popular Front into power, relegating him to the Canary Islands.


Franco joined the July 1936 military coup, which, after failing to take Spain, sparked the Spanish Civil War. He commanded Spain's African colonial army. 


Later, following the deaths of much of the rebel leadership, he became his faction's only leader, and was appointed generalissimo and head of state in 1936. He became recognised as a fascist leader while receiving support from Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany.[11] He consolidated all Nationalist groups into the FET y de las JONS (also known as the Movimiento Nacional), and developed a cult of personality around his rule. Three years later the Nationalists declared victory, which extended Franco's rule over Spain through a period of extreme repression of political opponents. His government's use of forced labour, concentration camps and executions after the war led to at least 30,000 deaths, with some estimates exceeding 200,000.[18] Combined with wartime killings, this brings the death toll of the White Terror to between 100,000 and 350,000 or more.[21] During World War II, he maintained Spanish neutrality, but supported the Axis powers, damaging the country's international reputation.


During the start of the Cold War, Franco lifted Spain out of its mid-20th century economic depression through technocratic and economically liberal policies, presiding over a period of accelerated growth known as the "Spanish miracle". At the same time, his regime transitioned from a totalitarian state to an authoritarian one with limited pluralism. He became a leader in the anti-communist movement, garnering support from the West, particularly the United States.[22][23] As the government relaxed its hard-line policies, Luis Carrero Blanco became Franco's éminence grise, whose role expanded after Franco began struggling with Parkinson's disease in the 1960s. In 1973, Franco resigned as prime minister—separated from the office of head of state since 1967—due to his advanced age and illness. Nevertheless, he remained in power as the head of state and as commander-in-chief. Franco died in 1975, aged 82, and was entombed in the Valley of the Fallen. He restored the monarchy in his final years, being succeeded by King Juan Carlos, who led the Spanish transition to democracy.


The legacy of Franco in Spanish history remains controversial, as the nature of his rule changed over time. His reign was marked by both severe repression, with tens of thousands killed, and economic prosperity, which greatly improved the quality of life in Spain. His style proved adaptable enough to allow social and economic reform, but still centred on highly authoritarian nationalism. Contemporaries regarded Franco as a fascist dictator. 


Among scholars, by contrast, there has been a long-lasting debate whether it is adequate to define Franco's regime as fascist. It has been described in broad definitions, from a traditional military dictatorship to a para-fascist or a fully fascist regime.[24][25][26]


Early life
Franco being held by his parents, on the day of his baptism on 17 December 1892


Francisco Paulino Hermenegildo Teódulo Franco Bahamonde was born on 4 December 1892 in the Calle Frutos Saavedra in Ferrol, Galicia,[27] into a seafaring family.[28] He was baptised thirteen days later at the military church of San Francisco, with the baptismal name Francisco Paulino Hermenegildo Teódulo.[27]


After relocating to Galicia, the Franco family was involved in the Spanish Navy, and over the span of two centuries produced naval officers for six uninterrupted generations (including several admirals),[28] down to Franco's father Nicolás Franco Salgado-Araújo [es] (22 November 1855 – 22 February 1942).[29]


His mother, María del Pilar Bahamonde y Pardo de Andrade [gl] (15 October 1865 – 28 February 1934), was from an upper-middle-class Roman Catholic family. Her father, Ladislao Bahamonde Ortega, was the commissar of naval equipment at the Port of El Ferrol. Franco's parents married in 1890 in the Church of San Francisco in El Ferrol.[30] The young Franco spent much of his childhood with his two brothers, Nicolás and Ramón, and his two sisters, María del Pilar and María de la Paz. His brother Nicolás was a naval officer and diplomat who married María Isabel Pascual del Pobil.[31] Ramón was an internationally known aviator, a military man like his other two brothers, and a Freemason, originally with leftist political leanings. He was also the second sibling to die, killed in an air accident on a military mission in 1938.[32]


Franco's father was a naval officer who reached the rank of vice admiral (intendente general). When Franco was fourteen, his father moved to Madrid following a reassignment and ultimately abandoned his family, marrying another woman. While Franco did not suffer any great abuse by his father's hand, he never overcame his antipathy for his father and largely ignored him for the rest of his life. Years after becoming leader, under the pseudonym Jaime de Andrade, Franco wrote a brief novel called Raza, whose protagonist is believed by Stanley Payne to represent the idealised man Franco wished his father had been. Conversely, Franco strongly identified with his mother (who always wore widow's black once she realised her husband had abandoned her) and learned from her moderation, austerity, self-control, family solidarity and respect for Catholicism, though he would also inherit his father's harshness, coldness and implacability.[33]


Military career
Main article: Military career and honours of Francisco Franco


Rif War and advancement through the ranks

Franco would have followed his father into the Navy, but as a result of the Spanish–American War the country lost much of its navy as well as most of its colonies. Not needing any more officers, the Naval Academy admitted no new entrants from 1906 to 1913. To his father's chagrin, Franco decided to try the Spanish Army. In 1907, he entered the Infantry Academy in Toledo. At the age of fourteen, Franco was one of the youngest members of his class, with most boys being between sixteen and eighteen. He was short and was bullied for his small size. His grades were average; though his good memory meant he seldom struggled academically, his small stature was a hindrance in physical tests. He graduated in July 1910 as a second lieutenant, standing 251st out of 312 cadets in his class, though this might have had less to do with his grades than with his small size and young age. Stanley Payne observes that by the time civil war began, Franco had already become a major general and would soon be a generalissimo, while none of his higher-ranking fellow cadets had managed to get beyond the rank of lieutenant-colonel.[34][35] Franco was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant in June 1912 at age 19.[36][37] Two years later, he obtained a commission to Morocco. Spanish efforts to occupy the new African protectorate provoked the Second Melillan campaign in 1909 against native Moroccans, the first of several Riffian rebellions. Their tactics resulted in heavy losses among Spanish military officers, and also provided an opportunity to earn promotion through merit on the battlefield. It was said that officers would receive either la caja o la faja (a coffin or a general's sash). Franco quickly gained a reputation as an effective officer. Francisco and his brother Ramón in North Africa, 1925
 In 1913, Franco transferred into the newly formed regulares: Moroccan colonial troops with Spanish officers, who acted as elite shock troops.[38] In 1916, aged 23 with the rank of captain, Franco was shot in the abdomen by guerrilla gunfire during an assault on Moroccan positions at El Biutz, in the hills near Ceuta; this was the only time he was wounded in ten years of fighting.[39] The wound was serious, and he was not expected to live. His recovery was seen by his Moroccan troops as a spiritual event – they believed Franco to be blessed with baraka or protected by God. He was recommended for promotion to major and to receive Spain's highest honour for gallantry, the coveted Cruz Laureada de San Fernando. Both proposals were denied, with the 23-year-old Franco's young age being given as the reason for denial. Franco appealed the decision to the king, who reversed it.[39] Franco also received the Cross of Maria Cristina, First Class.[40]


With that he was promoted to major at the end of February 1917 at age 24. This made him the youngest major in the Spanish army. From 1917 to 1920, he served in Spain. In 1920, Lieutenant Colonel José Millán Astray, a histrionic but charismatic officer, founded the Spanish Foreign Legion, along similar lines to the French Foreign Legion. Franco became the Legion's second-in-command and returned to Africa. In the Rif War, the poorly commanded and overextended Spanish Army was defeated by the Republic of the Rif under the leadership of the Abd el-Krim brothers, who crushed a Spanish offensive on 24 July 1921, at Annual. The Legion and supporting units relieved the Spanish city of Melilla after a three-day forced march led by Franco. In 1923, now a lieutenant colonel, he was made commander of the Legion.


On 22 October 1923, Franco married María del Carmen Polo y Martínez-Valdès (11 June 1900 – 6 February 1988).[41] Following his honeymoon Franco was summoned to Madrid to be presented to King Alfonso XIII.[42] This and other occasions of royal attention would mark him during the Republic as a monarchical officer.


Disappointed with the plans by Lieutenant General Miguel Primo de Rivera, Spain's Prime Minister, for a strategic retreat from the interior to the African coastline, Colonel Franco wrote in the April 1924 issue of Revista de Tropas Coloniales (Colonial Troops Magazine) that he would disobey orders of retreat given by a superior. As a result, Franco had a tense meeting with Primo de Rivera in July.


Lieutenant Colonel Franco visited a fellow africanista, General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano, on 21 September 1924 to propose that Queip de Llano organise a coup d'état against Primo.[43] In the end, Franco complied with General Primo's orders, taking part in the retreat of Spanish soldiers from Xaouen in late 1924, and thus earning a promotion to colonel.[44]


Franco led the first wave of troops ashore at Al Hoceima (Spanish: Alhucemas) in 1925. This landing in the heartland of Abd el-Krim's tribe, combined with the French invasion from the south, spelled the beginning of the end for the short-lived Republic of the Rif. Franco was promoted to brigadier general on 3 February 1926, said to be the youngest general in Europe.[45] 


On 14 September 1926, Franco and Polo had a daughter, María del Carmen. However, persistent rumors and historical research strongly suggest that she may have actually been the biological daughter of Franco's younger brother, Ramon Franco and a prostitute who died after giving birth to her. The theory stems from rumors that Francisco Franco was sterile following his abdominal injury suffered in 1916. Furthermore, there is a lack of photographs showing Carmen Polo pregnant, photos of Maria as a baby, and the absence of a proper medical birth certificate.[46] In any case, Franco would have a close relationship with his daughter and was a proud parent, though his traditionalist attitudes and increasing responsibilities meant he left much of the child-rearing to his wife.[47] 


In 1928 Franco was appointed director of the newly created General Military Academy of Zaragoza, a new college for all Spanish army cadets, replacing the former separate institutions for young men seeking to become officers in infantry, cavalry, artillery, and other branches of the army. Franco was removed as Director of the Zaragoza Military Academy in 1931; when the Civil War began, the colonels, majors, and captains of the Spanish Army who had attended the academy when he was its director displayed unconditional loyalty to him as Caudillo.[48]


During the Second Spanish Republic

The municipal elections of 12 April 1931 were largely seen as a plebiscite on the monarchy.[49] The Republican-Socialist alliance failed to win the majority of the municipalities in Spain but had a landslide victory in all the large cities and in almost all the provincial capitals.[50] The monarchists and the army deserted Alfonso XIII and consequently the king decided to leave the country and go into exile, giving way to the Second Spanish Republic. Although Franco believed that the majority of the Spanish people still supported the crown, and although he regretted the end of the monarchy, he did not object, nor did he challenge the legitimacy of the republic.[51] The closing of the academy in June by the provisional War Minister Manuel Azaña however was a major setback for Franco and provoked his first clash with the Spanish Republic. Azaña found Franco's farewell speech to the cadets insulting.[52] In his speech Franco stressed the Republic's need for discipline and respect.[53] Azaña entered an official reprimand into Franco's personnel file and for six months Franco was without a post and under surveillance.[52]


In December 1931, a new reformist, liberal, and democratic constitution was declared. It included strong provisions enforcing a broad secularisation of the Catholic country, which included the abolishing of Catholic schools and charities, which many moderate committed Catholics opposed.[54] At this point, once the constituent assembly had fulfilled its mandate of approving a new constitution, it should have arranged for regular parliamentary elections and adjourned, according to historian Carlton J. H. Hayes. Fearing the increasing popular opposition, the Radical and Socialist majority postponed the regular elections, thereby prolonging their stay in power for two more years. This way the republican government of Manuel Azaña initiated numerous reforms to what in their view would "modernize" the country.[55]


Franco was a subscriber to the journal of Acción Española, a monarchist organisation, and a firm believer in a supposed Jewish-Masonic-Bolshevik conspiracy, or contubernio (conspiracy). The conspiracy suggested that Jews, Freemasons, Communists, and other leftists alike sought the destruction of Christian Europe, with Spain being the principal target.[56]
Franco in 1930


On 5 February 1932, Franco was given a command in A Coruña. Franco avoided involvement in José Sanjurjo's attempted coup that year, and even wrote a hostile letter to Sanjurjo expressing his anger over the attempt. As a result of Azaña's military reform, in January 1933 Franco was relegated from first to 24th in the list of brigadiers. The same year, on 17 February he was given the military command of the Balearic Islands. The post was above his rank, but Franco was still unhappy that he was stuck in a position he disliked. The prime minister wrote in his diary that it was probably more prudent to have Franco away from Madrid.[57][58]


In 1932, the Jesuits, who were in charge of many schools throughout the country, were banned and had all their property confiscated.[59] The army was further reduced, and landowners were expropriated. Home rule was granted to Catalonia, with a local parliament and a president of its own.[60] In June 1933 Pope Pius XI issued the encyclical Dilectissima Nobis (Our Dearly Beloved), "On Oppression of the Church of Spain", in which he criticised the anti-clericalism of the Republican government.[59]


The elections held in October 1933 resulted in a centre-right majority. The political party with the most votes was the Confederación Español de Derechas Autónomas ("CEDA"), but president Alcalá-Zamora declined to invite the leader of the CEDA, Gil Robles, to form a government.[61] Instead, he invited the Radical Republican Party's Alejandro Lerroux to do so. Despite receiving the most votes, CEDA was denied cabinet positions for nearly a year.[62] After a year of intense pressure, CEDA, the largest party in the congress, was finally successful in forcing the acceptance of three ministries. The entrance of CEDA in the government, despite being normal in a parliamentary democracy, was not well accepted by the left. The Socialists triggered an insurrection that they had been preparing for nine months. The leftist Republican parties did not directly join the insurrection, but their leadership issued statements that they were "breaking all relations" with the Republican government.[63] The Catalan Bloc Obrer i Camperol (BOC) advocated the need to form a broad workers' front and took the lead in forming a new and more encompassing Alianza Obrera, which included the Catalan UGT and the Catalan sector of the PSOE, with the goal of defeating fascism and advancing the socialist revolution. The Alianza Obrera declared a general strike "against fascism" in Catalonia in 1934.[64] A Catalan state was proclaimed by Catalan nationalist leader Lluis Companys, but it lasted just ten hours. Despite an attempt at a general stoppage in Madrid, other strikes did not endure. This left the striking Asturian miners to fight alone.[65]


In several mining towns in Asturias, local unions gathered small arms and were determined to see the strike through. It began on the evening of 4 October, with the miners occupying several towns, attacking and seizing local Civil and Assault Guard barracks.[66] Thirty-four priests, six young seminarists with ages between 18 and 21, and several businessmen and civil guards were summarily executed by the revolutionaries in Mieres and Sama, 58 religious buildings including churches, convents and part of the university at Oviedo were burned and destroyed,[67] and over 100 priests were killed in the diocese.[68] Franco, already General of Division and aide to the war minister, Diego Hidalgo, was put in command of the operations directed to suppress the violent insurgency. Troops of the Spanish Army of Africa carried this out, with General Eduardo López Ochoa as commander in the field. After two weeks of heavy fighting (and a death toll estimated between 1,200 and 2,000), the rebellion was suppressed.


The insurgency in Asturias in October 1934 sparked a new era of violent anti-Christian persecutions with the massacre of 34 priests, initiating the practice of atrocities against the clergy,[69] and sharpened the antagonism between Left and Right. Franco and López Ochoa (who, prior to the campaign in Asturias, had been seen as a left-leaning officer)[70] emerged as officers prepared to use "troops against Spanish civilians as if they were a foreign enemy".[71] Franco described the rebellion to a journalist in Oviedo as, "a frontier war and its fronts are socialism, communism and whatever attacks civilisation to replace it with barbarism." Though the colonial units sent to the north by the government at Franco's recommendation[67] consisted of the Spanish Foreign Legion and the Moroccan Regulares Indigenas,[72] the right-wing press portrayed the Asturian rebels as lackeys of a foreign Jewish-Bolshevik conspiracy.[73]


With this rebellion against legitimate established political authority, the socialists also repudiated the representative institutional system as the anarchists had done.[74] The Spanish historian Salvador de Madariaga, an Azaña supporter, and an exiled vocal opponent of Francisco Franco is the author of a sharp critical reflection against the participation of the left in the revolt: "The uprising of 1934 is unforgivable. The argument that Mr Gil Robles tried to destroy the Constitution to establish fascism was, at once, hypocritical and false. With the rebellion of 1934, the Spanish left lost even the shadow of moral authority to condemn the rebellion of 1936."[75]


At the start of the Civil War, López Ochoa was assassinated; his head was severed and paraded around the streets on a pole, with a card reading, 'This is the butcher of Asturias'.[76] Sometime after these events, Franco was briefly commander-in-chief of the Army of Africa (from 15 February onwards), and from 19 May 1935, on, Chief of the General Staff.

1936 general election
Main article: 1936 Spanish general election


At the end of 1935, President Alcalá-Zamora manipulated a petty-corruption issue into a major scandal in parliament, and eliminated Alejandro Lerroux, the head of the Radical Republican Party, from the premiership. Subsequently, Alcalá-Zamora vetoed the logical replacement, a majority centre-right coalition, led by the CEDA, which would reflect the composition of the parliament. He then arbitrarily appointed an interim prime minister and after a short period announced the dissolution of parliament and new elections.[77]


Two wide coalitions formed: the Popular Front on the left, ranging from the Republican Union to the communists, and the Frente Nacional on the right, ranging from the centre radicals to the conservative Carlists. On 16 February 1936 the elections ended in a virtual draw, but in the evening leftist mobs started to interfere in the balloting and in the registration of votes, distorting the results.[78][79] Stanley G. Payne claims that the process was blatant electoral fraud, with widespread violation of the laws and the constitution.[80][81] In line with Payne's point of view, in 2017 two Spanish scholars, Manuel Álvarez Tardío and Roberto Villa García published the result of a major research work in which they concluded that the 1936 elections were rigged,[82][83] a view disputed by Paul Preston,[84] and other scholars such as Iker Itoiz Ciáurriz, who denounces their conclusions as revisionist "classic Francoist anti-republican tropes".[85]


On 19 February, the cabinet presided over by Portela Valladares resigned, with a new cabinet being quickly set up, composed chiefly of members of the Republican Left and the Republican Union and presided over by Manuel Azaña.[86]


José Calvo Sotelo, who made anti-communism the focus of his parliamentary speeches, began spreading violent propaganda—advocating for a military coup d'état, formulating a catastrophist discourse of a dichotomous choice between "communism" or a markedly totalitarian "National" State, and setting the mood of the masses for a military rebellion. The diffusion of the myth about an alleged Communist coup d'état as well a pretended state of "social chaos" became pretexts for a coup. Franco himself along with General Emilio Mola had stirred an anti-Communist campaign in Morocco.[87]


On 23 February, Franco was sent to the Canary Islands to serve as the islands' military commander, an appointment perceived by him as a destierro (banishment).[88] Meanwhile, a conspiracy led by General Mola was taking shape.[citation needed]


Interested in the parliamentary immunity granted by a seat at the Cortes, Franco intended to stand as candidate of the Right Bloc alongside José Antonio Primo de Rivera for the by-election in the province of Cuenca programmed for 3 May 1936, after the results of the February 1936 election were annulled in the constituency. But Primo de Rivera refused to run alongside a military officer (Franco in particular) and Franco himself ultimately desisted on 26 April, one day before the decision of the election authority. By that time, PSOE politician Indalecio Prieto had already deemed Franco as a "possible caudillo for a military uprising".[89]


Disenchantment with Azaña's rule continued to grow and was dramatically voiced by Miguel de Unamuno, a republican and one of Spain's most respected intellectuals, who in June 1936 told a reporter who published his statement in El Adelanto that President Manuel Azaña should "...debiera suicidarse como acto patriótico" ("commit suicide as a patriotic act").[90]


In June 1936, Franco was contacted, and a secret meeting was held within La Esperanza forest on Tenerife to discuss starting a military coup.[91] An obelisk (which has subsequently been removed) commemorating this historic meeting was erected at the site in a clearing at Las Raíces in Tenerife.[92]


Outwardly, Franco maintained an ambiguous attitude until nearly July. On 23 June 1936, he wrote to the head of the government, Casares Quiroga, offering to quell the discontent in the Spanish Republican Army, but received no reply. The other rebels were determined to go ahead con Paquito o sin Paquito (with Paquito or without Paquito; Paquito being a diminutive of Paco, which in turn is short for Francisco), as it was put by José Sanjurjo, the honorary leader of the military uprising. After various postponements, 18 July was fixed as the date of the uprising. The situation reached a point of no return and as presented to Franco by Mola, the coup was unavoidable, and he had to choose a side. He decided to join the rebels and was given the task of commanding the Army of Africa. A privately owned DH 89 De Havilland Dragon Rapide, flown by two British pilots, Cecil Bebb and Hugh Pollard,[93] was chartered in England on 11 July to take Franco to Africa.


The coup underway was precipitated by the assassination of the right-wing opposition leader Calvo Sotelo in retaliation for the murder of assault guard José Castillo, which had been committed by a group headed by a civil guard and composed of assault guards and members of the socialist militias.[94] On 17 July, one day earlier than planned, the Army of Africa rebelled, detaining their commanders. On 18 July, Franco published a manifesto[95] and left for Africa, where he arrived the next day to take command.


A week later the rebels, who soon called themselves the Nationalists, controlled a third of Spain; most naval units remained under control of the Republican loyalist forces, which left Franco isolated. The coup had failed in the attempt to bring a swift victory, but the Spanish Civil War had begun.[citation needed]


From the Spanish Civil War to World War II
Franco in a meeting of his government, 1939

Franco rose to power during the Spanish Civil War, which began in July 1936 and officially ended with the victory of his Nationalist forces in April 1939. Although it is impossible to calculate precise statistics concerning the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, Payne writes that if civilian fatalities above the norm are added to the total number of deaths for victims of violence, the number of deaths attributable to the civil war would reach approximately 344,000.[96] During the war, rape, torture, and summary executions committed by soldiers under Franco's command were used as a means of retaliation and to repress political dissent.[97]


The war was marked by foreign intervention on behalf of both sides. Franco's Nationalists were supported by Fascist Italy, which sent the Corpo Truppe Volontarie and by Nazi Germany, which sent the Condor Legion. Italian aircraft stationed on Mallorca bombed Barcelona thirteen times, dropping forty-four tons of bombs aimed at civilians.[98][99] Similarly, both Italian and German planes bombed the Basque town of Guernica at Franco's request. The Republican opposition was supported by communists, socialists, and anarchists within Spain as well as the Soviet Union and volunteers who fought in the International Brigades.[100]


First months
Twenty-six Republicans executed by Francoists at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War, buried in a mass grave at Estépar

Following the pronunciamiento of 18 July 1936, Franco assumed the leadership of the 30,000 soldiers of the Spanish Army of Africa.[101] The first days of the insurgency were marked by an imperative need to secure control over the Spanish Moroccan Protectorate. On one side, Franco had to win the support of the native Moroccan population and their (nominal) authorities, and, on the other, he had to ensure his control over the army. His method was the summary execution of some 200 senior officers loyal to the Republic (one of them was his own cousin). His loyal bodyguard was shot by Manuel Blanco. Franco's first problem was how to move his troops to the Iberian Peninsula, since most units of the Navy had remained in control of the Republic and were blocking the Strait of Gibraltar. He requested help from Benito Mussolini, who responded with an offer of arms and planes.[102] In Germany Wilhelm Canaris, the head of the Abwehr military intelligence service, persuaded Hitler to support the Nationalists;[103] Hitler sent 20 Ju 52 transport aircraft and six Heinkel biplane fighters, on the condition that they were not to be used in hostilities unless the Republicans attacked first.[104] Mussolini sent 12 Savoia-Marchetti SM.81 transport/bombers, and a few fighter aircraft. From 20 July onward Franco was able, with this small squadron of aircraft, to initiate an air bridge that carried 1,500 soldiers of the Army of Africa to Seville, where these troops helped to ensure rebel control of the city.[105] He successfully negotiated with Germany, and Italy for more military support, and above all for more aircraft. On 25 July aircraft began to arrive in Tetouan and on 5 August Franco was able to break the blockade, successfully deploying a convoy of fishing boats and merchant ships carrying some 3,000 soldiers; between 29 July and 15 August about 15,000 more men were moved.[105]


On 26 July, just eight days after the revolt had started, foreign allies of the Republican government convened an international communist conference at Prague to arrange plans to help the Popular Front forces in Spain. Communist parties throughout the world quickly launched a full scale propaganda campaign in support of the Popular Front. The Communist International (Comintern) immediately reinforced its activity, sending to Spain its Secretary-General, the Bulgarian Georgi Dimitrov, and the Italian Palmiro Togliatti, chief of the Communist Party of Italy.[106][107] From August onward, aid from the Soviet Union began; by February 1937 two ships per day arrived at Spain's Mediterranean ports carrying munitions, rifles, machine guns, hand grenades, artillery, and trucks. With the cargo came Soviet agents, technicians, instructors and propagandists.[108]


The Communist International immediately started to organise the International Brigades, volunteer military units which included the Garibaldi Brigade from Italy and the Lincoln Battalion from the United States. The International Brigades were usually deployed as shock troops, and as a result they suffered high casualties.[109]


In early August, the situation in western Andalucia was stable enough to allow Franco to organise a column (some 15,000 men at its height), under the command of then Lieutenant-Colonel Juan Yagüe, which would march through Extremadura towards Madrid. On 11 August Mérida was taken, and on 15 August Badajoz, thus joining both Nationalist-controlled areas. Additionally, Mussolini ordered a voluntary army, the Corpo Truppe Volontarie (CTV) of fully motorised units (some 12,000 Italians), to Seville, and Hitler added to them a professional squadron from the Luftwaffe (2JG/88) with about 24 planes. All these planes had the Nationalist Spanish insignia painted on them, but were flown by Italian and German nationals. The backbone of Franco's air force in those days was the Italian SM.79 and SM.81 bombers, the biplane Fiat CR.32 fighter and the German Junkers Ju 52 cargo-bomber and the Heinkel He 51 biplane fighter.[110]


On 21 September, with the head of the column at the town of Maqueda (some 80 km away from Madrid), Franco ordered a detour to free the besieged garrison at the Alcázar of Toledo, which was achieved on 27 September.[111] This controversial decision gave the Popular Front time to strengthen its defences in Madrid and hold the city that year,[112] but with Soviet support.[113] Kennan writes that once Stalin had decided to assist the Spanish Republicans, the operation was put in place with remarkable speed and energy. The first load of arms and tanks arrived as early as 26 September and was secretly unloaded at night. Advisers accompanied the armaments. Soviet officers were in effective charge of military operations on the Madrid front. Kennan believes that this operation was originally conducted in good faith with no other purpose than saving the Republic.[114]


Hitler's policy for Spain was shrewd and pragmatic.[115] The minutes of a conference with his foreign minister and army chiefs at the Reich Chancellery in Berlin on 10 November 1937 summarised his views on foreign policy regarding the Spanish Civil War: "On the other hand, a 100 percent victory for Franco was not desirable either, from the German point of view; rather were we interested in a continuance of the war and in the keeping up of the tension in the Mediterranean."[116][117] Hitler distrusted Franco; according to the comments he made at the conference he wanted the war to continue, but he did not want Franco to achieve total victory. He felt that with Franco in undisputed control of Spain, the possibility of Italy intervening further or of its continuing to occupy the Balearic Islands would be prevented.[118]


By February 1937 the Soviet Union's military help started to taper off, to be replaced by limited economic aid.


Rise to power
Franco and other rebel commanders during the Civil War, c. 1936–1939

The designated leader of the uprising, General José Sanjurjo, died on 20 July 1936 in a plane crash. In the Nationalist zone, "political life ceased".[119] Initially, only military command mattered: this was divided into regional commands: (Emilio Mola in the North, Gonzalo Queipo de Llano in Seville commanding Andalucia, Franco with an independent command, and Miguel Cabanellas in Zaragoza commanding Aragon. The Spanish Army of Morocco was itself split into two columns, one commanded by General Juan Yagüe and the other commanded by Colonel José Varela.[citation needed]


From 24 July a coordinating junta, the National Defence Junta, was established, based at Burgos. Nominally led by Cabanellas, as the most senior general, it initially included Mola, three other generals, and two colonels; Franco was later added in early August.[120] On 21 September it was decided that Franco was to be commander-in-chief (this unified command was opposed only by Cabanellas),[121] and, after some discussion, with no more than a lukewarm agreement from Queipo de Llano and from Mola, also head of government.[122] He was, doubtlessly, helped to this primacy by the fact that in late July Hitler had decided that all of Germany's aid to the Nationalists would go to Franco.[123]


Mola had been somewhat discredited as the main planner of the attempted coup that had now degenerated into a civil war, and was strongly identified with the Carlist monarchists and not at all with the Falange, a party with Fascist leanings and connections ("phalanx", a far-right Spanish political party founded by José Antonio Primo de Rivera), nor did he have good relations with Germany. Queipo de Llano and Cabanellas had both previously rebelled against the government of General Miguel Primo de Rivera and were therefore discredited in some nationalist circles, and Falangist leader José Antonio Primo de Rivera was in prison in Alicante (he would be executed a few months later). The desire to keep a place open for him prevented any other Falangist leader from emerging as a possible head of state. Franco's previous aloofness from politics meant that he had few active enemies in any of the factions that needed to be placated, and he had also cooperated in recent months with both Germany and Italy.[124]


On 1 October 1936, in Burgos, Franco was publicly proclaimed as Generalísimo of the National army and Jefe del Estado (Head of State).[125] When Mola was killed in another air accident a year later on 2 June 1937 (which some believe was an assassination), no military leader was left from those who had organised the conspiracy against the Republic between 1933 and 1935.[126]


Military command

Franco personally guided military operations from this time until the end of the war. Franco himself was not a strategic genius, but he was very effective at organisation, administration, logistics and diplomacy.[127] After the failed assault on Madrid in November 1936, Franco settled on a piecemeal approach to winning the war, rather than bold manoeuvring. As with his decision to relieve the garrison at Toledo, this approach has been subject of some debate:[128] some of his decisions, such as in June 1938 when he preferred to advance towards Valencia instead of Catalonia,[129] remain particularly controversial from a military strategic viewpoint.[130] Valencia, Castellon and Alicante saw the last Republican troops defeated by Franco.


Although both Germany and Italy provided military support to Franco, the degree of influence of both powers on his direction of the war seems to have been very limited. Nevertheless, the Italian troops, despite not always being effective, were present in most of the large operations in large numbers. Germany sent insignificant numbers of combat personnel to Spain, but aided the Nationalists with technical instructors and modern matériel;[131] including some 200 tanks and 600 aircraft[132] which helped the Nationalist air force dominate the skies for most of the war.[133]


Franco's direction of the German and Italian forces was limited, particularly in the direction of the Condor Legion, but he was by default their supreme commander, and they declined to interfere in the politics of the Nationalist zone.[134] For reasons of prestige it was decided to continue assisting Franco until the end of the war, and Italian and German troops paraded on the day of the final victory in Madrid.[135]


The Nationalist victory could be accounted for by various factors:[136] the Popular Front government had reckless policies in the weeks prior to the war, where it ignored potential dangers and alienated the opposition, encouraging more people to join the rebellion, while the rebels had superior military cohesion, with Franco providing the necessary leadership to consolidate power and unify the various rightist factions.[137] His foreign diplomacy secured military aid from Italy and Germany and, by some accounts, helped keep Britain and France out of the war.[127]


The rebels made effective use of a smaller navy, acquiring the most powerful ships in the Spanish fleet and maintaining a functional officer corps, while Republican sailors had assassinated a large number of their naval officers who sided with the rebels in 1936, as at Cartagena,[138] and El Ferrol.[139] The Nationalists used their ships aggressively to pursue the opposition, in contrast to the largely passive naval strategy of the Republicans.


Not only did the Nationalists receive more foreign aid to sustain their war effort, but there is evidence that they made more efficient use of such aid.[140] They augmented their forces with arms captured from the Republicans,[141] and successfully integrated over half of Republican prisoners of war into the Nationalist army.[142] The rebels were able to build a larger air force and make more effective use of their air force, particularly in supporting ground operations and bombing; and generally enjoyed air superiority from mid-1937 onwards; this air power contributed greatly to the Nationalist victory.[143]


The Republicans were subject to disunity and infighting,[144] and were hampered by the destructive consequences of the revolution in the Republican zone: mobilisation was impeded, the Republican image was harmed abroad in democracies, and the campaign against religion aroused overwhelming and unwavering Catholic support for the Nationalists.[145]


Political command

Francoist demonstration in Salamanca (1937) with the paraders carrying banners with the portrait of Franco and the populace giving the Roman salute


On 19 April 1937, Franco and Ramón Serrano Súñer, the brother-in-law of Franco's wife, Carmen Polo, who became Franco's advisor on Falangist party matters, with the acquiescence of Generals Mola and Quiepo de Llano, forcibly merged the ideologically distinct national-syndicalist Falange and the Carlist monarchist parties into one party under his rule, dubbed Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista (FET y de las JONS),[146] which became the only legal party in the Nationalist zone.[147] Serrano Súñer and a group of his followers dominated the FET JONS, and strove to increase the party's power. Serrano Súñer tried to move the party in a more fascist direction by appointing his acolytes to important positions, and the party became the leading political organisation in Francoist Spain. The FET JONS failed to establish a fascist party regime, however, and was relegated to subordinate status. Franco placed the Carlist Manuel Fal Condé under house arrest and imprisoned hundreds of old Falangists, the so-called "old shirts" (camisas viejas), including the party leader Manuel Hedilla,[148] to help secure his political future. Franco also appeased the Carlists by exploiting the Republicans' anti-clericalism in his propaganda, in particular concerning the "Martyrs of the war". While the Republican forces presented the war as a struggle to defend the Republic against fascism, Franco depicted himself as the defender of "Catholic Spain" against "atheist communism".[149][150] As the new head of the Falange, Franco presented himself as the direct successor to its founder Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera and justified his actions as completing his work. Falangism and its party linked Franco with fascism, permitting Franco to be recognised as a fascist leader.[11]


Unlike some other fascist movements, the Falangists had developed an official program in 1934, the "Twenty-Seven Points".[151] In 1937, Franco assumed as the tentative doctrine of his regime 26 out of the original 27 points.[152] Franco made himself jefe nacional (National Chief) of the new FET (Falange Española Tradicionalista; Traditionalist Spanish Phalanx) with a secretary, Political Junta and National Council to be named subsequently by himself. Five days later on 24 April the raised-arm salute of the Falange was made the official salute of the Nationalist regime.[153] Also in 1937 the Marcha Real ("Royal March") was restored by decree as the national anthem in the Nationalist zone. It was opposed by the Falangists, who associated it with the monarchy and boycotted it when it was played, often singing their own anthem, Cara al Sol (Facing the Sun) instead.[154] By 1939 the fascist style prevailed, with ritual rallying calls of "Franco, Franco, Franco."[155]


End of the Civil War

By early 1939 only Madrid (see History of Madrid), Barcelona and Catalan, and a few other areas remained under control of the government forces. Franco's troops captured Barcelona in January 1939.


On 27 February Chamberlain's Britain and Daladier's France officially recognised the Franco regime. On 28 March 1939, with the help of pro-Franco forces inside the city (the "fifth column" General Mola had mentioned in propaganda broadcasts in 1936), Madrid fell to the Nationalists. The next day, Valencia, which had held out under the guns of the Nationalists for close to two years, also surrendered. Victory was proclaimed on 1 April 1939, when the last of the Republican forces surrendered. On the same day, Franco placed his sword upon the altar of a church and vowed to never take it up again unless Spain itself was threatened with invasion.


Although Germany had recognised the Franco Government, Franco's policy towards Germany was extremely cautious until spectacular German victories at the beginning of the Second World War. An early indication that Franco was going to keep his distance from Germany soon proved true. A rumoured state visit by Franco to Germany did not take place and a further rumour of a visit by Goering to Spain, after he had enjoyed a cruise in the Western Mediterranean, again did not materialise. Instead Goering had to return to Berlin.[156]


During the Civil War and in the aftermath, a period known as the White Terror took place. This saw mass executions of Republican and other Nationalist enemies, standing in contrast to the wartime Red Terror. Historical analysis and investigations estimate the number of executions by the Franco regime during this time to be between 100,000 and 200,000 dead.


Stanley G. Payne says the total number of all kinds of executions in the Republican zone added up to about 56,000, and that those in the Nationalist zone probably amounted to at least 70,000, with an additional 28,000 executions after the war ended.[12][157] Searches conducted with parallel excavations of mass graves in Spain by the Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory (Asociación para la Recuperación de la Memoria Histórica), (ARMH) estimate that more than 35,000 people killed by the Nationalist side are still missing in mass graves.[158]


Julián Casanova Ruiz, who was nominated in 2008 to join the panel of experts in the first judicial investigation, conducted by judge Baltasar Garzón, of Francoist crimes,[159] as well as historians Josep Fontana and Hugh Thomas, estimate deaths in the White Terror to be around 150,000 in total.[13][160][14] According to Paul Preston, while "130,199" remains "the currently most reliable" figure of civilian executions took place in the Francoist area during the war, "it is unlikely" that it was less than 150,000,[20][note 1] with 50,000 victims in the Republican area, in addition to approximately 20,000 Republicans executed by the Franco regime after the end of the war.[162] According to Helen Graham, the Spanish working classes became to the Francoist project what the Jews were to the German Volksgemeinschaft.[163]


According to Gabriel Jackson and Antony Beevor, the number of victims of the "White Terror" (executions and hunger or illness in prisons) between 1939 and 1943 was 200,000.[135] Beevor "reckons Franco's ensuing 'white terror' claimed 200,000 lives. The 'red terror' had already killed 38,000."[164] Julius Ruiz concludes that "although the figures remain disputed, a minimum of 37,843 executions were carried out in the Republican zone with a maximum of 150,000 executions (including 50,000 after the war) in Nationalist Spain."[165] According to Michael Richards, "as many as 200,000" people were executed by Francoists after the war.[17]

Franco arriving in San Sebastián in 1939, escorted by the Moorish Guard


Despite the end of the war, Spanish guerrillas exiled in France, and known as the "Maquis", continued to resist Franco in the Pyrenees, carrying out sabotage and robberies against the Francoist regime. Several exiled Republicans also fought in the French resistance against the German occupation in Vichy France during World War II. In 1944, a group of republican veterans from the French resistance invaded the Val d'Aran in northwest Catalonia but were quickly defeated. The activities of the Maquis continued well into the 1950s.


The end of the war led to hundreds of thousands of exiles, mostly to France, but also to Mexico, Chile, Cuba, and the United States.[166] On the other side of the Pyrenees, refugees were confined in internment camps in France, such as Camp Gurs or Camp Vernet, where 12,000 Republicans were housed in squalid conditions (mostly soldiers from the Durruti Division[167]). The 17,000 refugees housed in Gurs were divided into four categories: Brigadists, pilots, Gudaris and ordinary "Spaniards". The Gudaris (Basques) and the pilots easily found local backers and jobs, and were allowed to quit the camp, but the farmers and ordinary people, who could not find relations in France, were encouraged by the French government, in agreement with the Francoist government, to return to Spain. The great majority did so and were turned over to the Francoist authorities in Irún. From there they were transferred to the Miranda de Ebro concentration camp for "purification" according to the Law of Political Responsibilities.


After the proclamation by Marshal Philippe Pétain of the Vichy France regime, the refugees became political prisoners, and the French police attempted to round up those who had been liberated from the camp. Along with other "undesirables", they were sent to the Drancy internment camp before being deported to Nazi Germany. 4,427 Spaniards thus died in Mauthausen concentration camp.[168] The Chilean poet Pablo Neruda, who had been named by the Chilean President Pedro Aguirre Cerda special consul for immigration in Paris, was given responsibility for what he called "the noblest mission I have ever undertaken": shipping more than 2,000 Spanish refugees, who had been housed by the French in squalid camps, to Chile on an old cargo ship, the Winnipeg.[169]


World War II
Further information: Spain during World War II
Front row in order from left to right: Karl Wolff, Heinrich Himmler, Franco and Spain's Foreign Minister Serrano Súñer in Madrid, during Himmler's visit to Spain, October 1940
Franco and Adolf Hitler in Meeting at Hendaye, 1940

In September 1939, World War II began. Franco had received important support from Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini during the Spanish Civil War, and he had signed the Anti-Comintern Pact. He made pro-Axis speeches,[170] while offering various kinds of support to Italy and Germany. His spokesman Antonio Tovar commented at a Paris conference entitled 'Bolshevism versus Europe' that "Spain aligned itself definitively on the side of...National Socialist Germany and Fascist Italy."[171] However, Franco was reluctant to enter the war due to Spain recovering from its recent civil war and instead pursued a policy of "non-belligerence".


On 23 October 1940, Hitler and Franco met in Hendaye, France to discuss the possibility of Spain's entry on the side of the Axis. Franco's demands, including large supplies of food and fuel, as well as Spanish control of Gibraltar and French North Africa, proved too much for Hitler. At the time Hitler did not want to risk damaging his relations with the new Vichy French government.[172] (An oft-cited remark attributed to Hitler is that the German leader said that he would rather have some of his own teeth pulled out than to have to personally deal further with Franco.)[173]


Some historians argue that Franco made demands he knew Hitler would not accede to, in order to stay out of the war. Other historians argue that Franco, as the leader of a destroyed and bankrupt country in chaos following a brutal three-year civil war, simply had little to offer the Axis and that the Spanish armed forces were not ready for a major war. It has also been suggested that Franco decided not to join the war after the resources he requested from Hitler in October 1940 were not forthcoming.[174]


Franco allowed Spanish soldiers to volunteer to fight in the German Army against the Soviet Union (the Blue Division) but forbade Spaniards to fight in the West against the democracies. Franco's common ground with Hitler was particularly weakened by Hitler's attempts to manipulate Christianity, which went against Franco's fervent commitment to defending Catholicism. Contributing to the disagreement was an ongoing dispute over German mining rights in Spain.


According to some scholars, after the Fall of France in June 1940, Spain did adopt a pro-Axis stance (for example, German and Italian ships and U-boats were allowed to use Spanish naval facilities) before returning to a more neutral position in late 1943 when the tide of the war had turned decisively against the Axis Powers, and Italy had changed sides. Franco was initially keen to join the war before the UK could be defeated.[175]Franco in Reus, 1940


In the winter of 1940 and 1941, Franco toyed with the idea of a "Latin Bloc" formed by Spain, Portugal, Vichy France, the Vatican and Italy, without much consequence.[176] Franco had cautiously decided to enter the war on the Axis side in June 1940, and to prepare his people for war, an anti-British and anti-French campaign was launched in the Spanish media that demanded French Morocco, Cameroon and Gibraltar.[177] On 19 June 1940, Franco pressed along a message to Hitler saying he wanted to enter the war, but Hitler was annoyed at Franco's demand for the French colony of Cameroon, which had been German before World War I, and which Hitler was planning on taking back for Plan Z.[178] Franco seriously considered blocking allied access to the Mediterranean Sea by invading British-held Gibraltar, but he abandoned the idea after learning that the plan would have likely failed due to Gibraltar being too heavily defended. In addition, declaring war on the UK and its allies would no doubt give them an opportunity to capture both the Canary Islands and Spanish Morocco, as well as possibly launch an invasion of mainland Spain itself.[179][180] Franco was aware that his air force would be quickly defeated if going into action against the Royal Air Force, and the Royal Navy would easily be able to destroy Spain's small navy and blockade the entire Spanish coast to prevent imports of crucial materials such as oil. Spain depended on oil imports from the United States, which were almost certain to be cut off if Spain formally joined the Axis.

Franco with Italian leader Benito Mussolini in 1941

Franco and his foreign minister Ramón Serrano Suñer held a meeting with Mussolini and Ciano in Bordighera, Italy on 12 February 1941.[181] However, an affected Mussolini did not appear to be interested in Franco's help due to the defeats his forces had suffered in North Africa and the Balkans, and he even told Franco that he wished he could find any way to leave the war. When the invasion of the Soviet Union began on 22 June 1941, Serrano Suñer immediately suggested the formation of a unit of military volunteers to join the invasion.[182] Volunteer Spanish troops (the División Azul, or "Blue Division") fought on the Eastern Front under German command from 1941 to 1944. Some historians have argued that not all of the Blue Division were true volunteers and that Franco expended relatively small but significant resources to aid the Axis powers' battle against the Soviet Union.


Franco was initially disliked by Cuban president Fulgencio Batista, who, during World War II, suggested a joint US-Latin American declaration of war on Spain to overthrow Franco's regime.[183]




English Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Adolf Hitler's Letter to General Franco (6 February 1941)


Hitler may not have really wanted Spain to join the war, as he needed neutral harbours to import materials from countries in Latin America and elsewhere. He felt Spain would be a burden as it would be dependent on Germany for help. By 1941, Vichy French forces were proving their effectiveness in North Africa, reducing the need for Spanish help, and Hitler was wary about opening up a new front on the western coast of Europe as he struggled to reinforce the Italians in Greece and Yugoslavia. Franco signed a revised Anti-Comintern Pact on 25 November 1941. Spain continued to be able to obtain valuable German goods, including military equipment, as part of payment for Spanish raw materials,[184] and traded wolfram with Germany until August 1944 when the Germans withdrew from the Spanish frontier.[174]


Spanish neutrality during World War II was publicly acknowledged by leading Allied statesmen.[185] In November 1942, US President Roosevelt wrote to General Franco: "...your nation and mine are friends in the best sense of the word."[186] In May 1944, Winston Churchill stated in the House of Commons: "In the dark days of the war the attitude of the Spanish Government in not giving our enemies passage through Spain was extremely helpful to us.... I must say that I shall always consider that a service was rendered...by Spain, not only to the United Kingdom and to the British Empire and Commonwealth, but to the cause of the United Nations."[187] According to the personal recollection of US Ambassador to Spain Carlton Hayes, similar gratitude was also expressed by the Provisional French Government at Algiers in 1943. Franco placed no obstacles to Britain's construction of a large air base extending from Gibraltar into Spanish territorial waters and welcomed the Anglo-American landings in North Africa. Spain did not intern any of the 1,200 American airmen who were forced to land in the country, but "gave them refuge and permitted them to leave."[188]


On 14 June 1940, Spanish forces in Morocco occupied Tangier (a city under international control) and did not leave until the war's end in 1945.


After the war, the Spanish government tried to destroy all evidence of its cooperation with the Axis and allowed many former Nazis, such as Otto Skorzeny and Léon Degrelle, and other fascists, to seek political asylum in Spain.[189]


Jews and anti-Semitism
Further information: Spain and the Holocaust

Franco had a controversial association with Jews before and during World War II.


When Franco's troops captured Barcelona in January 1939, the city's two synagogues were ransacked and bolted shut.[190]  With the fall of the republic, under Franco's regime all the Jews who had come to Spain after 1931 were expelled, and Jewish children were barred from attending public schools.[190] Imprisoned Republicans were forced to read the antisemitic and fabricated propaganda of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.[190]


Franco made antisemitic remarks in a speech in May 1939, and made similar remarks on at least six occasions during World War II.[191] Franco believed in the existence of a "Jewish-Masonic-Bolshevik conspiracy",[192] and he deliberately framed the Spanish Civil War as a conflict against Jews and Bolsheviks.[193]


In 2010, documents were discovered showing that on 13 May 1941, Franco had ordered his provincial governors to compile a list of Jews while he negotiated an alliance with the Axis powers.[194] Franco supplied Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler, architect of the Nazis' Final Solution, with a list of 6,000 Jews in Spain.[194]


Contrarily, according to Anti-Semitism: A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution (2005):

Throughout the war, Franco rescued many Jews. ... Just how many Jews were saved by Franco's government during World War II is a matter of historical controversy. Franco has been credited with saving anywhere from approximately 30,000 to 60,000 Jews; most reliable estimates suggest 45,000 is a likely figure.[195]


Preston writes that, in the post-war years, "a myth was carefully constructed to claim that Franco's regime had saved many Jews from extermination" as a means to deflect foreign criticism away from allegations of active collaboration with the Nazi regime.[196] As early as 1943, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs concluded that the Allies were likely to win the war. José Félix de Lequerica y Erquiza became Foreign Minister in 1944 and soon developed an "obsession" with the importance of the "Jewish card" in relations with the former Allied powers.[197]


Spain provided visas for thousands of French Jews to transit Spain en route to Portugal to escape the Nazis. Spanish diplomats protected about 4,000 Jews living in Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Austria. At least some 20,000 to 30,000 Jews were allowed to pass through Spain in the first half of the War. Jews who were not allowed to enter Spain, however, were sent to the Miranda de Ebro concentration camp or deported to France.


In January 1943, after the German embassy in Spain told the Spanish government that it had two months to remove its Jewish citizens from Western Europe, Spain severely limited visas, and only 800 Jews were allowed to enter the country.


After the war, Franco exaggerated his contributions to saving Jews in order to improve Spain's image in the world and end its international isolation.[195][198][page needed][199][200]


Under the pseudonym Jakim Boor, Franco praised the Protocols for exposing "the Talmudic doctrines and their conspiracy to seize the levers of power in society."[190] He also dismissed the Holocaust as "a handful of Jews falling foul of race laws."[190]


In the late 1940s and early 1950s, Franco did not recognise Israeli statehood, and maintained strong relations with the Arab world. Israel expressed disinterest in establishing relations, although there were some informal economic ties between the two countries in the later years of Franco's governance.[201] In the aftermath of the Six-Day War in 1967, Franco's Spain was able to utilise its positive relationship with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser and the Arab world (due to not having recognised the Israeli state) to allow 800 Egyptian Jews, many of Sephardic ancestry, safe passage out of Egypt on Spanish passports.[202] This was undertaken through Francoist Spain's Ambassador to Egypt, Ángel Sagaz Zubelzu, on the understanding that emigrant Jews would not immediately emigrate to Israel and that they would not publicly use the case as political propaganda against Nasser's Egypt.[202] On 16 December 1968, the Spanish government formally revoked the 1492 Edict of Expulsion against Spain's Jewish population.[203][204]


Franco and many in the government openly stated that they believed there was an international conspiracy of Freemasons and Communists against Spain, sometimes including Jews or "Judeo-Masonry" as part of this.[205] Franco was a staunch Catholic integralist, and under his rule the Spanish government explicitly endorsed the Catholic Church as the religion of the nation state and did not endorse liberal ideas such as religious pluralism or separation of Church and State found in the Republican Constitution of 1931.[206] Catholic doctrine was integrated into university education as part of the Franco regime's move to impose Catholicism into Spanish society.[207] Following the Second World War, the government enacted the "Spanish Bill of Rights" (Fuero de los Españoles), which extended the right to private worship of non-Catholic religions, including Judaism, though it did not permit the erection of religious buildings for this practice and did not allow non-Catholic public ceremonies.[208] With the pivot of Spain's foreign policy towards the United States during the Cold War, the situation changed with the 1967 Law on Religious Freedom, which granted full public religious rights to non-Catholics.[209]


In 1978, three years after Franco's death, with the new Constitution of Spain, the overthrow of Catholicism as the explicit state religion of Spain and the establishment of state-sponsored religious pluralism would be realised in Spain.


Francoist Spain
Main article: Francoist Spain

Franco visiting Tolosa, 1948

Franco was recognised as the Spanish head of state by the United Kingdom, France, and Argentina in February 1939.[210][211] Already proclaimed Generalísimo of the Nationalists and Jefe del Estado (Head of State) in October 1936,[125] he thereafter assumed the official title of "Su Excelencia el Jefe de Estado" ("His Excellency the Head of State"). He was also referred to in state and official documents as "Caudillo de España" ("the Leader of Spain"), and sometimes called "el Caudillo de la Última Cruzada y de la Hispanidad" ("the Leader of the Last Crusade and of the Hispanic heritage") and "el Caudillo de la Guerra de Liberación contra el Comunismo y sus Cómplices" ("the Leader of the War of Liberation Against Communism and Its Accomplices").


On paper, Franco had more power than any Spanish leader before or since. For the first four years after taking Madrid, he ruled almost exclusively by decree. The "Law of the Head of State," passed in August 1939, "permanently confided" all governing power to Franco; he was not required to even consult the cabinet for most legislation or decrees.[212] According to Payne, Franco possessed far more day-to-day power than Hitler or Stalin possessed at the respective heights of their power. He noted that while Hitler and Stalin maintained rubber-stamp parliaments, this was not the case in Spain in the early years after the war – a situation that nominally made Franco's regime "the most purely arbitrary in the world".[213]


This changed in 1942, when Franco convened a parliament known as the Cortes Españolas. It was elected in accordance with corporatist principles, and had little real power. Notably, it had no control over government spending, and the government was not responsible to it; ministers were appointed and dismissed by Franco alone.
Franco with former French President Charles de Gaulle at his Pardo residence near Madrid, 1970

With the end of World War II, Spain suffered from the consequences of its isolation from the international economy. Spain was excluded from the Marshall Plan,[214] unlike other neutral countries in Europe. This situation ended in part when, in the light of Cold War tensions and of Spain's strategic location, the United States of America entered into a trade and military alliance with Franco. This historic alliance commenced with the visit of US President Dwight D. Eisenhower to Spain in 1953, which resulted in the Pact of Madrid. Spain was then admitted to the United Nations in 1955.[215] American military facilities in Spain built since then include Naval Station Rota, Morón Air Base, and Torrejón Air Base.[216]


On 26 July 1947, Franco proclaimed Spain a monarchy, but did not designate a monarch. This gesture was largely done to appease the monarchists in the Movimiento Nacional (Carlists and Alfonsoists). Franco left the throne vacant, proclaiming himself as a de facto regent for life. At the same time, Franco appropriated many of the privileges of a king. He wore the uniform of a captain general (a rank traditionally reserved for the king) and resided in El Pardo Palace. In addition he began walking under a canopy, and his portrait appeared on most Spanish coins and postage stamps. He also added "by the grace of God", a phrase usually part of the styles of monarchs, to his style.


Franco initially sought support from various groups. His administration marginalised fascist ideologues in favour of technocrats, many of whom were linked with Opus Dei, who promoted economic modernisation.[217]


Francoism and fascism

Part of a series on
Fascism


Principles

Actual idealism

Aestheticization of politics

Anti-communism

Anti-intellectualism

Anti-materialism

Anti-pacifism

Authoritarianism

Chauvinism

Class collaboration

Corporatism

Counter-Enlightenment

Cult of personality

Dictatorship

Direct action

Dirigisme

Heroic capitalism

Heroic realism

Machismo

Masculinity

National syndicalism

New Man

One-party state

Proletarian nation

Propaganda

Reactionary modernism

Social Darwinism

Social order

State capitalism

Statolatry

Supercapitalism

Third Position

Totalitarianism

Ultranationalism

Palingenetic



Topics

Architecture

Criticism

Culture

Definitions

Economics

Ideology

Movements

Paramilitaries

Symbolism



Politicians

Balbo

Codreanu

Doriot

Degrelle

Engdahl

Franco

Goga

Gömbös

Hitler

Ljotić

Mosley

Mussolini

Nakano

Oviglio

O'Duffy

Quisling

Pavelić

Pavolini

Preto

Primo de Rivera

Rodzaevsky

Salgado

Sima

Strasser (Gregor)

Strasser (Otto)

Szálasi

Valois

Van Severen



Intellectuals

Ahimeir

Arthuys

Bardèche

Brasillach

Céline

Chamberlain

Chesterton

Civinini

Corradini

Crainic

Croce

Cupcea

D'Annunzio

Dilling

Drieu La Rochelle

Evola

Gentile

Giani

Gini

Ilyin

Ionescu

Kita

Krannhals

de Lapouge

Lewis

Malaparte

Manuilă

Marinetti

Michels

Mosley

Ojetti

Ōkawa

Olivetti

Orano

Panero

Pirandello

Pound

Ramos

Rosenberg

Saint-Loup

Savarkar

Scaligero

Schmitt

Schwarz

Sorel

Spirito

Streel

Thomson

Ungaretti

Valois



Literature

Prussianism and Socialism (1919)

Fascist Manifesto (1919)

Mein Kampf (1925)

Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925)

My Autobiography (1928)

The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930)

"The Doctrine of Fascism" (1932)

Twenty-Six Point Program ofthe Falange (1934)



Organizations

Arrow Cross Party

Blackshirts

Brazilian Integralist Action

British National Party

British Union of Fascists

Stewards

Canadian Union of Fascists

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Fasci Italiani di Combattimento'

French Popular Party

Iron Guard

Kokumin Dōmei

Lapua Movement

Mouvement Franciste

National Fascist Party

Opera Nazionale Balilla

Republican Fascist Party

Revolutionary Mexicanist Action

Rexist Party

Russian Fascist Party

School of Fascist Mysticism

Silver Legion of America

Squadrismo

Slovak People's Party

Tōhōkai

Ustaše

Ustaše Youth

Verdinaso

VFO

Vlajka


Media

Ajan Suunta

Der Angriff

Critica fascista

Fashist

Il Popolo d'Italia

Je suis partout

L'Idea Nazionale

Nástup

Neues Volk

Das Schwarze Korps

Völkischer Beobachter


History

History of fascism

pre-1922

1922–1945

1945–present

March on Rome

Beer Hall Putsch

Gentile Reform

Aventine Secession

Second Italo-Senussi War

Libyan genocide

German election of 1932

Enabling Act

Austrian Civil War

Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution

1934 Montreux Fascist conference

Second Italo-Ethiopian War

1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle

Spanish Civil War

Unification Decree

Battle of Cable Street

Anti-Comintern Pact

Kristallnacht

Italian invasion of Albania

Pact of Steel

Peasant March

World War II

The Holocaust

Genocide of Serbs in Croatia

Downfall in Italy

Downfall in Germany

Downfall in Thailand

Downfall in Yugoslavia

Surrender of Japan

Nuremberg trials

International Military Tribunal forthe Far East



Variants

Albanian

Arab

Argentine

Nacionalismo

Orthodox Peronism

Austrian

Austrian Nazism

Brazilian

Brazilian integralism

British

Christian

Clerical

Crypto-

Croat

Eco-

Falangism

Francoism

Pétainism

Valoisism

Hindutva

Hungarism

Ibañism

Ilminism

Irish

Islamic

Italian

Intransigent

Japanese

Emperor-system

Statism

Restoration

Ultra-

Techno-

Nazism

Austrian

Hitlerism

Strasserism

Swedish

Neo-

Finnish

Legionarism

Pan-Turkic

Rexism

Romanian

Neo-

Romanianism/Stelism

Russian

Swiss

Syndicalist

Syrian

Third Position

National-anarchism

National Bolshevism

Nazi-Maoism

Uruguayan

Marzism

Revisionism

Sosism



By continent

Asia

Europe

Bulgaria

Netherlands

Russia

North America

Canada

United States

South America

Peru

Uruguay



Related topics

Anti-fascism

Axis powers

Donald Trump and fascism

Extremism of the centre

Fascist as an insult

Feudal fascism

Glossary of Fascist Italy

Lebensphilosophie

Mediterraneanism

Para-fascism

Paramilitary

Post-fascism

Proto-fascism

Red fascism

Social fascism




 Politics portal

v
t
e

Franco's regime exhibited certain elements of fascism, characterised as trappings,[218][219][220][221] or as essential similarities with fascist regimes in culture, politics and social sphere.[25] The Oxford Living Dictionary and Oxford's A Dictionary of Philosophy present Franco's regime as an example of fascism.[222][223] Paul Preston, who views Francoism as the Spanish variant of fascism,[224] describes Franco's personal beliefs as "deeply conservative" shaped by a mentality of a colonial officer rather than the ones of Benito Mussolini, "the only absolutely indisputable fascist leader", and characterizes Franco as "something much worse" than a fascist in Franco's readiness, in Franco's own words, to "shoot half of Spain."[225] Stanley G. Payne argued that very few scholars consider Franco to be a "core fascist",[226] but at the same time, according to Payne, Franco accepted "the greater part" of Falangist program, although did not become a "genuine Falangist" in the way that he disagreed on "social and economic radicalism" of the pre-war Falange.[227] Richard Griffiths argues that a distinction between fascism and Franco's conservatism would not be understood neither by Franco himself nor his contemporaries.[228] According to such historians as Preston,[224] Julián Casanova,[229][page needed][26] and Ferran Gallego,[25] the Nationalists from conservatives to fascists acted as a unified movement, underwent fascisation and radicalisation in the course of the war and shared a common ideological culture which led to them establishing, according to these historians, fascism in Spain. The politics of the rebel army headed by Franco, according to Preston, became "undistinguishable" from fascism during the war.[224] Franco himself during the war used the radical fascist ideology of Falangism in construction of his regime, taking the Falange as the base for his party FET-JONS and presenting himself as the direct successor to Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera, the founder of the Falange who gained a posthumous personality cult in Francoist Spain of a martyr and the embodiment of the "New Spain". Franco presented himself as completing the work that the young Jose Antonio had begun, becoming recognised as a fascist leader.[11]


Franco's regime has been described in broad definitions: as a fascist regime, as a personalist dictatorship with fascist elements, or as a traditional military dictatorship.[26] It has also been variously presented as a "fascistized dictatorship",[230] or a "semi-fascist regime"[231] which underwent a phase which may be characterised as totalitarian or quasi-totalitarian and fascist or quasi-fascist.[232][233] Francisco Cobo Romero writes that, besides neutering left-wing advances by using an essentially antiliberal brand of ultranationalism, "in its attempt to emulate Fascism, Francoism resorted to the sacralization and mystification of the motherland, raising it into an object of cult, and coating it with a liturgic divinization of its leader".[234] Preston writes that the regime was fascist not only by its culture and aesthetics and politics, but also by its social functions, which included the defense of capitalism and its "fostering" in a revolutionary crisis that needed to be resolved through suppression and dismantling workers' movements and a democratic parliamentary system.[224]


All in all, some authors have pointed at a purported artificialness and failure of FET JONS in order to de-emphasise the Fascist weight within the regime whereas others have embedded those perceived features of "weak party" within the frame of a particular model of "Spanish Fascism".[235] However, new research material has been argued to underpin the "Fascist subject", both on the basis of the existence of a pervasive and fully differentiated Fascist falangist political culture, and on the importance of the Civil War for Falangism, which served as an area of experience, of violence, of memory, as well as for the generation of a culture of victory.[235] Under the perspective of a comparative of European fascisms, Javier Rodrigo considers the Francoist regime to be paradigmatic for three reasons: for being the only authoritarian European regime with totalitarian aspirations, for being the regime that deployed the most political violence in times of rhetorical peace, and for being the regime deploying the most effective "memoricidal" apparatus.[236] Preston points out that the characteristics used to point out the non-Fascist nature of Francoism were exhibited by Fascist Italy: the heterogenous nature of the FET JONS could be paralleled by the fusion of radical Italian Fascists with other right-wing groups after 1922, and similarly, Fascist regime, which was a 'compromise' of radical fascism and conservatism, displayed 'pluralism', including the partnership of the party and the army instead of full subjugation of the latter to the first.[224][237]


Political repression

This section needs more citations. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Francisco Franco" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (September 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

According to Preston's estimates, Franco's forces killed about 420,000 Spaniards in the theatre of war, through extrajudicial killings during the Civil War, and in state executions immediately following its end in 1939.[238] The first decade of Franco's rule following its end saw continued repression and the killing of an undetermined number of political opponents. In 1941 the prison population of Spain was 233,000, mostly political prisoners.[239] According to Antony Beevor, recent research in more than half of Spain's provinces indicates at least 35,000 official executions in the country after the war, suggesting that the generally accepted figure of 35,000 official executions is low. Accounting for unofficial and random killings, and those who died during the war from execution, suicide, starvation and disease in prison, the total number is possibly closer to 200,000.[240]Lluís Companys, president of Catalonia under the Republic, who was executed in 1940


By the start of the 1950s Franco's state had become less violent, but during his entire rule, non-government trade unions and all political opponents across the political spectrum, from communist and anarchist organisations to liberal democrats and Catalan or Basque separatists, were either suppressed or tightly controlled with all means, up to and including violent police repression.[241] The Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) and the Unión General de Trabajadores (UGT) trade unions were outlawed, and replaced in 1940 by the corporatist Sindicato Vertical. The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party and the Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya (ERC) were banned in 1939, while the Communist Party of Spain (PCE) went underground. The Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) went into exile, and in 1959 the ETA armed group was created to wage a low-intensity war against Franco.


Franco's Spanish nationalism promoted a unitary national identity by repressing Spain's cultural diversity. Bullfighting and flamenco[242] were promoted as national traditions while those traditions not considered "Spanish" were suppressed. Franco's view of Spanish tradition was somewhat artificial and arbitrary: while some regional traditions were suppressed, flamenco, an Andalucian tradition, was considered part of a larger, national identity. All cultural activities were subject to censorship, and many, such as the Sardana, the national dance of Catalonia, were plainly forbidden (often in an erratic manner). This cultural policy was relaxed over time, most notably during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Franco with King Saud of Saudi Arabia in Madrid, 1962

Franco also used language politics in an attempt to establish national homogeneity. He promoted the use of Castilian Spanish and suppressed other languages such as Catalan, Galician, and Basque. The legal usage of languages other than Castilian was forbidden. All government, notarial, legal and commercial documents were to be drawn up exclusively in Castilian and any documents written in other languages were deemed null and void. The usage of any other language was forbidden in schools, in advertising, and on road and shop signs. For unofficial use, citizens continued to speak these languages. This was the situation throughout the 1940s and to a lesser extent during the 1950s, but after 1960 the non-Castilian Spanish languages were freely spoken and written, and they reached bookshops and stages, although they never received official status.


Most country towns and rural areas were patrolled by pairs of Guardia Civil, a military police force for civilians, which functioned as Franco's chief means of social control. Larger cities and capitals were mostly under the jurisdiction of the Policia Armada, or the grises ("greys", due to the colour of their uniforms) as they were called.


Student revolts at universities in the late 1960s and early 1970s were violently repressed by the heavily armed Policía Armada (Armed Police), and plain-clothes police were present at lectures in Spanish universities.[243] The enforcement by public authorities of traditional Catholic values was a stated intent of the regime, mainly by using a law (the Ley de Vagos y Maleantes, Vagrancy Act) enacted by Azaña.[244] The remaining nomads of Spain (Gitanos and Mercheros like El Lute) were especially affected. Through this law, homosexuality and prostitution were made criminal offences in 1954.[245]


In private correspondence Chilean ruler Augusto Pinochet expressed his support for Franco's repression in 1975 when Spain received condemnation by the United Nations General Assembly for the execution of ETA and FRAP militants.[246]


Spanish colonies and decolonisation
Further information: Spanish Empire

Spain attempted to retain control of its colonies throughout Franco's rule. During the Algerian War (1954–62), Madrid became the base of the Organisation armée secrète (OAS), a right-wing French Army group which sought to preserve French Algeria. Despite this, Franco was forced to make some concessions. When Morocco became independent from France in 1956, he surrendered the territories of the Spanish protectorate to the new-born state, retaining only a few cities (the Plazas de soberanía). The year after, Mohammed V invaded Spanish Sahara during the Ifni War (known as the "Forgotten War" in Spain). Only in 1975, with the Green March, did Morocco take control of all of the former Spanish territories in the Sahara.


In 1968, under pressure from the United Nations,[247] Spain granted Equatorial Guinea its independence, and the following year it ceded Ifni to Morocco. Under Franco, Spain also pursued a campaign to force a negotiation on the British overseas territory of Gibraltar, and closed its border with that territory in 1969. The border would not be fully reopened until 1985.


Economic policy
Main article: Economy of Spain (1939–1959)
See also: Spanish miracle

The Civil War ravaged the Spanish economy.[248] Infrastructure had been damaged, workers killed, and daily business severely hampered. For more than a decade after Franco's victory, the devastated economy recovered very slowly. Franco initially pursued a policy of autarky, cutting off almost all international trade. The policy had devastating effects, and the economy stagnated. Only black marketeers could enjoy an evident affluence.

1963 Spanish peseta coin with an image of Franco and lettering reading: "Francisco Franco, Leader of Spain, by the grace of God"

On the brink of bankruptcy, a combination of pressure from the United States and the IMF managed to convince the regime to adopt a free market economy. Many of the old guard in charge of the economy were replaced by technocrats (technocrata), despite some initial opposition from Franco. The regime took its first faltering steps toward abandoning its pretensions of self-sufficiency and towards a transformation of Spain's economic system. Pre-Civil War industrial production levels were regained in the early 1950s, though agricultural output remained below prewar levels until 1958. The years from 1951 to 1956 were marked by substantial economic progress, but the reforms of the period were only sporadically implemented, and they were not well coordinated. From the mid-1950s there was a slow but steady acceleration in economic activity, but the relative lack of growth (compared to the rest of Western Europe) eventually forced the Franco regime to allow the introduction of liberal economic policies in the late 1950s. During the pre-stabilisation years of 1957–1959, Spanish economic planners implemented partial measures such as moderate anti-inflationary adjustments and incremental moves to integrate Spain into the global economy, but external developments and a worsening domestic economic crisis forced them to adopt more sweeping changes. A reorganisation of the Council of Ministers in early 1957 had brought a group of younger men, most of whom were educated in economics and had experience, to the key ministries. The process of integrating the country into the world economy was further facilitated by the reforms of the 1959 Stabilisation and Liberalisation Plan.[249][250]
Franco with US President Dwight D. Eisenhower in Madrid, December 1959

When Franco replaced his ideological ministers with the apolitical technocrats, the regime implemented several development policies that included deep economic reforms. After a recession, growth took off from 1959, creating an economic boom that lasted until 1974, and became known as the "Spanish miracle".


Concurrent with the absence of social reforms, and the economic power shift, a tide of mass emigration commenced to other European countries, and to a lesser extent, to South America. Emigration helped the regime in two ways. The country got rid of populations it would not have been able to keep in employment, and the emigrants supplied the country with much needed monetary remittances.


During the 1960s, the wealthy classes of Francoist Spain experienced further increases in wealth, particularly those who remained politically faithful, while a burgeoning middle class became visible as the "economic miracle" progressed. International firms established factories in Spain where salaries were low, company taxes very low, strikes forbidden and workers' health or state protections almost unheard of. State-owned firms like the car manufacturer SEAT, truck builder Pegaso, and oil refiner INH, massively expanded production. Furthermore, Spain was virtually a new mass market. Spain became the second-fastest growing economy in the world between 1959 and 1973, just behind Japan. By the time of Franco's death in 1975, Spain still lagged behind most of Western Europe but the gap between its per capita GDP and that of the leading Western European countries had narrowed greatly, and the country had developed a large industrialised economy.


Succession
Franco with Prince Juan Carlos in 1969

In the late 1960s, the ageing Franco decided to name a monarch to succeed his regency, but the simmering tensions between the Carlists and the Alfonsoists continued. In 1969, Franco formally nominated as his heir-apparent Prince Juan Carlos de Borbón, whose family sent him to Spain at age 10 to be educated there during Franco's reign,[251] with the new title of Prince of Spain, suggested by Laureano López Rodó to avoid a confrontation with Juan Carlos's father, Juan de Borbón, the Count of Barcelona.[252] This designation came as a surprise to the Carlist pretender to the throne, Prince Xavier of Bourbon-Parma, as well as to Don Juan.[253]


As his final years progressed, tensions within the various factions of the Movimiento would consume Spanish political life, as varying groups jockeyed for position in an effort to win control of the country's future.


Death and funeral
Main article: Death and funeral of Francisco Franco
Franco in October 1975, a month before his death

After a prolonged illness in his final years, Franco died on 20 November 1975 at the age of 82, according to a statement from the government, on the 39th anniversary of the death of José Antonio Primo de Rivera, the founder of the Falange. Historian Ricardo de la Cierva said, however, that he had been told around 6 pm on 19 November that Franco had already died.[254]


As soon as news of Franco's death was made public, the government declared thirty days of official national mourning. On 22 November, Juan Carlos was officially proclaimed King of Spain. There was a public viewing of Franco's body at the chapel in the Royal Palace; a requiem mass and a military parade were held on 23 November, the day of his burial.[255] The mass was attended, among others, by Chilean leader Augusto Pinochet, Bolivian leader Hugo Banzer and the First Lady of the Philippines, Imelda Marcos.[256][257] Major European governments, who condemned Franco's regime, declined to send high-level representatives to his funeral.[258]


Franco's body was interred near the grave of Primo de Rivera at the Valley of the Fallen (Valle de los Caídos), a colossal memorial built using forced labour by political prisoners, ostensibly to honour the casualties of both sides of the Spanish Civil War.[255] He was the only person interred in the Valley who did not die during the civil war.[259][260] As the cortège with Franco's body arrived, some 75,000 rightists wearing the blue shirts of the Falangists greeted it with rebel songs from the civil war and fascist salutes.[261]


Following Franco's funeral, his widow, Carmen Polo, supervised the moving of crates of jewellery, antiques, artworks, and Franco's papers to the family's various estates in Spain or to safe havens in foreign countries. The family remained extremely rich after his death. Polo had a room in her apartment in which the walls were lined from floor to ceiling with forty columns of twenty drawers, some containing tiaras, necklaces, earrings, garlands, brooches and cameos. Others contained gold, silver, diamonds, emeralds, rubies, topazes, and pearls, but the most valuable jewels were kept in bank vaults.[262]


Exhumation and reburial
Main article: Exhumation and reburial of Francisco Franco
In 2019, Franco's body was removed from the monument of Santa Cruz del Valley of the Fallen, where it had lain since his funeral in 1975.

On 11 May 2017, the Congress of Deputies approved, by 198–1 with 140 abstentions, a motion driven by the Socialist Workers' Party ordering the Government to exhume Franco's remains.[263]


On 24 August 2018, the Government of Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez approved legal amendments to the Historical Memory Law stating that only those who died during the Civil War would be buried at the Valle de los Caídos, resulting in plans to exhume Franco's remains for reburial elsewhere. Deputy Prime Minister Carmen Calvo Poyato stated that having Franco buried at the monument "shows a lack of respect ... for the victims buried there". The government gave Franco's family a 15-day deadline to decide Franco's final resting place, or else a "dignified place" would be chosen by the government.[264]


On 13 September 2018, the Congress of Deputies voted 176–2, with 165 abstentions, to approve the government's plan to remove Franco's body from the monument.[265]


Franco's family opposed the exhumation and attempted to prevent it by making appeals to the Ombudsman's Office. The family expressed its wish that Franco's remains be reinterred with full military honours at the Almudena Cathedral in the centre of Madrid, the burial place he had requested before his death.[266] The demand was rejected by the Spanish Government, which issued another 15-day deadline to choose another site.[267] Because the family refused to choose another location, the Spanish Government ultimately chose to rebury Franco at the Mingorrubio Cemetery in El Pardo, where his wife Carmen Polo and a number of Francoist officials, most notably prime ministers Luis Carrero Blanco and Carlos Arias Navarro, are buried.[268] His body was to be exhumed from the Valle de los Caídos on 10 June 2019, but the Supreme Court of Spain ruled that the exhumation would be delayed until the family had exhausted all possible appeals.[269]


On 24 September 2019, the Supreme Court ruled that the exhumation could proceed, and the Sánchez government announced that it would move Franco's remains to the Mingorrubio cemetery as soon as possible.[270] On 24 October 2019 his remains were moved to his wife's mausoleum which is located in the Mingorrubio Cemetery, and buried in a private ceremony.[271] Though barred by the Spanish government from being draped in the Spanish flag, Francisco Franco's grandson, also named Francisco Franco, draped his coffin in the Nationalist flag.[272] According to a poll by the Spanish newspaper, El Mundo, 43% of Spanish people approved of the exhumation while 32.5% opposed it. Opinions on the exhumation were divided by party line, with the Socialist party strongly in favour of the exhumation as well as the removal of his statue there. There seems to be no consensus on whether the statue should simply be moved or completely destroyed.[273]


Legacy
Further information: Spanish transition to democracy
See also: Symbols of Francoism § Statues of Franco, and Military career and honours of Francisco Franco § Honorific eponyms
Franco greeting Egypt's President Gamal Abdel Nasser at Madrid airport, 24 September 1960

Part of a series on
Francoism


Organizations

Movimiento Nacional

FET y de las JONS

Council of the Realm

National Council of the Movement

Spanish Syndical Organization

Frente de Juventudes

Sección Femenina

Armed Police Corps

General Police Corps

Tribunal de Orden Público

Instituto Nacional de Colonización

Instituto Nacional de Industria

Fuerzas Armadas de España

Cortes Españolas

Sindicato Español Universitario

Servicio Exterior de Falange


History

Spanish coup of July 1936

Spanish Civil War

White Terror

Francoist concentration camps

Spain during World War II

Spain and the Holocaust

First Francoism

First Francoist government

Concordat of 1953

Pact of Madrid

Stabilization Plan

Spanish miracle

Burgos trials

Assassination of Luis Carrero Blanco

Death of Francisco Franco

Spanish transition to democracy


Ideology

Anti-democracy

Anti-leftism

Anti-communism

Anti-liberalism

Anti-Masonry

Antisemitism

Authoritarianism

Totalitarianism

Corporativism

Falangism

Hispanic eugenics

Militarism

Monarchism

Natalism

National Catholicism

National conservatism

National syndicalism

Pan-Hispanism

Spanish irredentism

Spanish nationalism

Spanish unionism

State capitalism

Traditionalism


PeopleFrancisco Franco

Blanco

Fernández-Cuesta

Fernández-Miranda

Fraga

de la Fuente

Minguijón

Navarro

Oreja Elósegui (Marcelino)

Oreja Elósegui (Ricardo)

Piñar

Rosales

Serrano Suñer

de Toledo

de Valcárcel

Vigón

Yagüe


Economy

Economy of Spain (1939–1959)

First Development Plan

Second Development Plan

Third Development Plan

Stabilization Plan


Culture

Cantos nacionales

Cara al Sol

Censorship in Francoist Spain

DGCT

Eagle of Saint John

El Caudillo

El Generalísimo

Gender roles in Francoist Spain

Motherhood in Francoist Spain

Francoist mottos

No-Do

Revisionist historiography

Sociological Francoism

Symbols of Francoism

Yoke and arrows


Laws and referendums

Francoist electoral regime

Law of Political Responsibilities

Army Conscription and Replacement Law

Fundamental Laws of the Realm

Ley de Sucesión en la Jefatura del Estado

Organic Law of the State

Political Reform Act

1947 Spanish law of succession referendum

1966 Spanish organic law referendum


Neo-Francoism

Búnker

Francisco Franco National Foundation

New Force

National Alliance July 18

National Union (Spain)

23-F

Spanish Solidarity


Related topics

Blue Division

Economic history of Argentina

Francoist influence in Chile

Lost children of Francoism

Carlo-francoism

Diplomatic relations

Spanish question

Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA)

Francoist language policies

Latin Bloc (proposed alliance)

Miracle of Chile

Pact of Forgetting

Para-fascism

Pinochetism

Project Islero

Second Spanish Republic

Spanish Maquis

Valley of the Fallen



 Politics portal

 Spain portal

v
t
e

In Spain and abroad, the legacy of Franco remains controversial. The longevity of Franco's rule (39 years in the Nationalist Zone and 36 years in all of Spain), his suppression of political opposition, and his government's effective propaganda sustained through the years have made a detached evaluation difficult. For almost 40 years, Spaniards, and particularly children at school, were told that Divine Providence had sent Franco to save Spain from chaos, atheism, and poverty.[274] Historian Stanley Payne described Franco as being the most significant figure to dominate Spain since King Felipe II,[275] while Michael Seidman argued that Franco was the most successful counter-revolutionary leader of the 20th century.[276]


A highly controversial figure within Spain, Franco is seen as a divisive leader. Supporters credit him for keeping Spain neutral and uninvaded during the Second World War. They emphasise his strong anti-communist and nationalist views, economic policies, and opposition to socialism as major factors in Spain's post-war economic success and later international integration.[277] For Spain's neutrality during the war he was praised by Winston Churchill, Charles de Gaulle and Franklin D. Roosevelt.[185][186] He was also supported by Konrad Adenauer and many American Catholics, but was later strongly opposed by the Harry S. Truman administration.[278] The Palmarian church canonised Franco.[279]


The American conservative commentator William F. Buckley, Jr was an admirer of Franco, and praised him effusively in his magazine, National Review, where the staff were also ardent admirers of the leader. In 1957, Buckley called him "an authentic national hero",[280] who "above others", had the qualities needed to wrest Spain from "the hands of the visionaries, ideologues, Marxists and nihilists".[281]


Conversely, critics on the left have denounced him as a tyrant responsible for thousands of deaths in years-long political repression and have called him complicit in atrocities committed by Axis forces during the Second World War due to his support of the Axis governments.


When he died in November 1975, the major parties of the left and the right in Spain agreed to follow the Pact of Forgetting. To secure the transition to democracy, they agreed not to have investigations or prosecutions dealing with the civil war or Franco. The agreement effectively lapsed after 2000, the year the Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory (Asociación para la Recuperación de la Memoria Histórica (ARMH)) was founded and the public debate started.[282] In 2006, a poll indicated that almost two-thirds of Spaniards favoured a "fresh investigation into the war".[283]
A statue of Franco in Santander was removed in 2008.

Franco served as a role model for several anti-communist leaders in South America. Augusto Pinochet is known to have admired Franco.[284] Similarly, as recently as 2006, Franco supporters in Spain have honoured Pinochet.[285] Even in 2024, the American book Unhumans by Jack Posobiec lauded Franco as a hero.[286]


In 2006, the BBC reported that Maciej Giertych, an MEP of the clerical-nationalist League of Polish Families, had expressed admiration for Franco, stating that the Spanish
leader "guaranteed the maintenance of traditional values in Europe".[287]


Spaniards who suffered under Franco's rule have sought to remove memorials of his regime. Most government buildings and streets that were named after Franco during his rule have been reverted to their original names. Owing to Franco's human-rights record, the Spanish government in 2007 banned all official public references to the Franco regime and began the removal of all statues, street names and memorials associated with the regime, with the last statue reportedly being removed in 2008 in the city of Santander.[288] Churches that retain plaques commemorating Franco and the victims of his Republican opponents may lose state aid.[289] Since 1978, the national anthem of Spain, the Marcha Real, does not include lyrics introduced by Franco. Attempts to give the national anthem new lyrics have failed due to lack of consensus.
People saluting in front of the empty plinth from which the equestrian statue of Franco in Madrid had been removed

On 11 February 2004, Luis Yáñez-Barnuevo and others presented a motion for the "Need for international condemnation of the Franco regime" to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.[290] In March 2006, the Permanent Commission of the Parliamentary Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution "firmly" condemning the "multiple and serious violations" of human rights committed in Spain under the Francoist regime from 1939 to 1975.[291] The resolution was at the initiative of Leo Brincat and of the historian Luis María de Puig and was the first international official condemnation of the repression enacted by Franco's regime. The resolution also urged that historians (professional and amateur) be given access to the various archives of the Francoist regime, including those of the private Francisco Franco National Foundation (FNFF) which, along with other Francoist archives, remain inaccessible to the public as of 2006. The FNFF received various archives from El Pardo Palace and is alleged to have sold some of them to private individuals.[292] Furthermore, the resolution urged the Spanish authorities to set up an underground exhibit in the Valle de los Caidos monument to explain the "terrible" conditions in which it was built. Finally, it proposed the construction of monuments to commemorate Franco's victims in Madrid and other important cities.[291]


In Spain, a commission to "repair the dignity" and "restore the memory" of the "victims of Francoism" (Comisión para reparar la dignidad y restituir la memoria de las víctimas del franquismo) was approved in 2004 and is directed by the social-democratic deputy Prime Minister María Teresa Fernández de la Vega.[291]


Recently, the Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory (ARHM) initiated a systematic search for mass graves of people executed during Franco's regime, which has been supported since the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party's (PSOE) victory during the 2004 elections by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero's government. A Ley de la memoria histórica de España (Law on the Historical Memory of Spain) was approved on 28 July 2006, by the Council of Ministers,[293] but it took until 31 October 2007 for the Congress of Deputies to approve an amended version as: "The Bill to recognise and extend rights and to establish measures in favour of those who suffered persecution or violence during the Civil War and the Dictatorship" (in common parlance still known as Law of Historical Memory).[294] The Senate approved the bill on 10 December 2007.[295]
Sign in Santa Cruz de Tenerife for a street bearing Franco's name which was renamed in 2008 Rambla de Santa Cruz

Official endeavours to preserve the historical memory of Spanish life under the Franco regime include exhibitions like the one held at the Museu d'Història de Catalunya (Museum of Catalan History) in 2003–2004, titled "Les presons de Franco". This exposition depicted the experiences of prisoners in Franco's prison system and described other aspects of the penal system such as women's prisons, trials, the jailers, and prisoners' families.[296] The Museum no longer maintains its online version of the exhibition.


The accumulated wealth of Franco's family (including much real estate inherited from Franco, such as the Pazo de Meirás, the Canto del Pico in Torrelodones and the Casa Cornide [es] in A Coruña) and its provenance have also become matters of public discussion. Estimates of the family's wealth have ranged from 350 million to 600 million euros.[292] While Franco was dying, the Francoist Cortes voted a large public pension for his wife Carmen Polo, which the later democratic governments kept paying. At the time of her death in 1988, Carmen Polo was receiving a pension of over 12.5 million pesetas (four million more than the salary of Felipe González, then head of the government).[292]


In popular media

Cinema and television


Raza or Espíritu de una Raza (Spirit of a Race) (1941), based on a script by Jaime de Andrade (Franco himself), is the semi-autobiographical story of a military officer played by Alfredo Mayo.

Franco, ese hombre (That man, Franco) (1964) is a pro-Franco documentary film directed by José Luis Sáenz de Heredia

The movie Dragon Rapide (1986) deals with the events previous to the Spanish Civil War, with the actor Juan Diego playing Franco

Argentine actor José "Pepe" Soriano played both Franco and his double in Espérame en el cielo (Wait for Me in Heaven) (1988).

Ramon Fontserè played him in ¡Buen Viaje, Excelencia! (Bon Voyage, Your Excellency!) (2003).

Manuel Alexandre played Franco in the TV movie 20-N: Los ultimos dias de Franco (20-N: The Last Days of Franco) (2008)

Juan Viadas played Franco in Álex de la Iglesia's movie Balada triste de trompeta (The Last Circus) (2010)

The first-season episode Cómo se reescribe el tiempo of the Spanish television series El Ministerio del Tiempo (2015) sets events around Franco's October 1940 meeting with Adolf Hitler at Hendaye. Franco is portrayed by actor Pep Mirás.

At the end of the movie La reina de España (The Queen of Spain), Franco, played by Carlos Areces, is spat on in the face by the fictional Macarena Granada (Penélope Cruz), a Spanish Hollywood star who has returned to Spain to film a movie during Franco's reign.



Music

French singer-songwriter and anarchist Léo Ferré wrote "Franco la muerte", a song he recorded for his 1964 album Ferré 64. In this highly confrontational song, he directly shouts at the Franco and lavishes him with contempt. Ferré refused to sing in Spain until Franco was dead.


Literature

Franco is a character in CJ Sansom's book Winter in Madrid

...Y al tercer año resucitó (...And On the Third Year He Rose Again) (1980) describes what would happen if Franco rose from the dead.

Franco is featured in the novel Triage (1998) by Scott Anderson.

Franco is the centrepiece of the satirical work El general Franquisimo o La muerte civil de un militar moribundo (The Great General Franco, or the Civil Death of a Dying Soldier) by Andalucian political cartoonist and journalist Andrés Vázquez de Sola.[297]

Franco features in several novels by Caroline Angus Baker, including Vengeance in the Valencian Water, visiting the aftermath of the 1957 Valencia floods, and Death in the Valencian Dust, about the final executions handed down before his death in 1975.


Honours and arms
See also: Military career and honours of Francisco Franco § Awards


Arms and guidon

 Personal arms (1940–1975)[298]
 Guidon as Head of State[299]



See also


Biography portal
Politics portal
Spain portal

General Secretariat of the Head of State

"Generalissimo Francisco Franco is still dead"

Language politics in Francoist Spain

Symbols of Francoism


Notes


↑ The more than 150,000 executions for political reasons was ten times the number of those in Nazi Germany and 1,000 times the number in Fascist Italy. Reig Tapia points out that Franco signed more decrees of execution than any other previous head of state in Spain.[161]



↑ The rebels appointed him Generalissimo of the Armies and Head of the Government of the Spanish State at the end of September 1936, while in 1938 he gained the formal title Caudillo.[1][2] Head of State was one of the titles most frequently used by the regime after Franco's official appointment on 1 October 1936, and was the title used in the 1967 Organic Law of the State.[3][non-primary source needed][4][non-primary source needed][5][non-primary source needed]

1 2 In civil war until 1 April 1939.

↑ The post of Prime Minister was attached to that of Head of State until the 1967 Organic Law of the State, with the separation coming into force with Franco's resignation as Prime Minister on 9 June 1973.[6]

↑ President of the Technical State Junta of the Nationalist side

↑ /ˈfræŋkoʊ/[8] or /ˈfrɑːŋkoʊ/;[9] Spanish: [fɾanˈθisko ˈfɾaŋko βa.aˈmonde]

↑ Full baptismal name: Francisco Paulino Hermenegildo Teódulo Franco Bahamonde

↑ In this Spanish name, the first or paternal surname is  Franco and the second or maternal family name is  Bahamonde. 



References

Citations


↑ Spanish Politics: Democracy After Dictatorship. Polity. 2008. ISBN 978-0-7456-3992-5.

↑ Oxford Dictionary of English. OUP Oxford. 19 August 2010. ISBN 978-0-19-957112-3.

↑ "Decreto núm. 138. Nombrando Jefe del Gobierno del Estado Español al Excelentísimo Sr. General de División don Francisco Franco Bahamonde, quien asumirá todos los poderes del nuevo Estado" (PDF). Boletín Oficial de la Junta de Defensa Nacional de España (in Spanish) (32). Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado: 125–126. 30 September 1936. ISSN 0212-033X.

↑ "Ley organizando la Administración Central del Estado" (PDF). Boletín Oficial del Estado (in Spanish) (467). Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado: 5514–5515. 31 January 1938. ISSN 0212-033X.

↑ "Ley Orgánica del Estado, número 1/1967, de 10 de enero" (PDF). Boletín Oficial del Estado (in Spanish) (9). Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado: 466–477. 11 January 1967. ISSN 0212-033X.

↑ "Ley 14/1973, de 8 de junio, por la que se suspende la vinculación de la Presidencia del Gobierno a la Jefatura del Estado" (PDF). Boletín Oficial del Estado (in Spanish) (138). Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado: 11686. 9 June 1973. ISSN 0212-033X.

↑ Gobierno de España - Presidencia del Gobierno (ed.). "Relación cronológica de los presidentes del Consejo de Ministros y del Gobierno". La Moncloa (in Spanish). Retrieved 18 January 2023. Prime Minister of the Second Spanish Republic between 17 May 1937-31 March 1939

↑ "Definition of Franco". www.dictionary.com. Retrieved 23 January 2025.

↑ "Franco". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Merriam-Webster. OCLC 1032680871.

↑ Preston 1994, p. 25.

1 2 3 Quiroga, Alejandro (12 July 2012). Right-Wing Spain in the Civil War Era Soldiers of God and Apostles of the Fatherland, 1914-45. Bloomsbury. p. 91, 137. ISBN 9781441114792.

1 2 3 Payne 2012, p. 110.

1 2 3 Casanova et al. 2004, p. 8.

1 2 3 Fontana 2000, p. 22.

1 2 Preston 2006, p. 202.

1 2 Beevor 2006, p. 94.

1 2 Richards 1998, p. 11.

↑ [12][13][14][15][16][17]

↑ Thomas 2013, pp. 900–901.

1 2 Preston 2012, p. xviii.

↑ [12][13][14][19][15][16][20]

↑ Rubottom & Murphy 1984, p. 12.

↑ Payne 2000, p. 645.

↑ Moradiellos 2017.

1 2 3 Fascist Warfare, 1922–1945: Aggression, Occupation, Annihilation. Springer International Publishing. 2019. p. 12. ISBN 9783030276485.

1 2 3 Press, Propaganda and Politics: Cultural Periodicals in Francoist Spain and Communist Romania. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 2014. pp. 4–5. ISBN 9781443865678.

1 2 Preston 1995, p. 1.

1 2 Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 4.

↑ Moradiellos 2017, p. 22.

↑ Preston 1995, p. 3.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 157.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 8–9.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 5–8.

↑ Jensen 2005, pp. 13–14.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 12–15.

↑ Jensen 2005, p. 28.

↑ Hodges 2002, p. 34.

↑ Payne 2011, p. 71.

1 2 Ellwood 2014, p. 15.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 30.

↑ Romero Salvadó 2013, p. 259.

↑ Preston 1995, pp. 42, 62.

↑ Casals 2006, p. 212.

↑ Casals 2006, pp. 211–212.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 50.

↑ Zavala, José María (2009). Franco, el republicano: la vida secreta del hermano maldito del Caudillo. pp. 302, 348.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 54.

↑ Casanova & Andrés 2014, p. 238.

↑ Jackson 2012, p. 518.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 66.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 68.

1 2 Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 74.

↑ Franco Bahamonde 2020, p. 42.

↑ Preston 2006, p. 53.

↑ Hayes 1951, p. 91.

↑ Preston 2010, pp. 42, 45.

↑ Sangster 2018, p. 83.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 80–81.

1 2 Castillo 2019, p. 92.

↑ Ben-Ami 1981, p. 220.

↑ Raguer 2007, p. 32.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 84–85.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 88.

↑ Payne 2008, p. $2.

↑ Vincent 2007, p. 133.

↑ Jackson 2012, pp. 154–155.

1 2 Thomas 2013, p. 132.

↑ de la Cueva 1998, p. 356.

↑ de la Cueva 1998, p. 365.

↑ Preston 1995, p. 103.

↑ Preston 2010, p. 61.

↑ Balfour 2002, pp. 252–254.

↑ Sangster 2018, p. 87.

↑ Casanova 2010, p. 111.

↑ Hernández 2015, p. 125.

↑ Preston 2012, p. 266.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 97–98.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 108.

↑ "Riots Sweep Spain on Left's Victory; Jails Are Stormed", The New York Times, 18 February 1936.

↑ Payne 1993, p. 319.

↑ Siaroff 2013, p. 119.

↑ García & Tardío 2017, p. ?.

↑ Redondo, Javier (12 March 2017). "El 'pucherazo' del 36" (in Spanish). El Mundo.

↑ Preston 2020, p. 252.

↑ Ciáurriz 2020, p. 103.

↑ Avilés Farré 2006, pp. 397–398.

↑ González Calleja 2016, p. 5.

↑ Preston 1995, p. 120.

↑ Villaverde 1999, p. 16.

↑ Evans 2013, p. 125.

↑ "Las raíces insulares de Franco (The island roots of Franco)". El País (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 May 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2013.

↑ "El monumento a Franco en Las Raíces será retirado (Monument to Franco's meeting to be removed)" (in Spanish). Laopinion. 29 September 2008. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2013.

↑ Mathieson, David (18 July 2006). "article in the Guardian about Cecil Bebb". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

↑ Cortada, James W. (2011). Modern Warfare in Spain. Potomac Books, Inc. p. 43. ISBN 978-1612341019.

↑ "Manifesto de las palmas" (in Spanish). 18 July 1936. Retrieved 21 July 2006.

↑ Payne 2012, pp. 244–245.

↑ Patterson 2007, p. 9.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 194.

↑ Alpert 2019, p. 174.

↑ MCCannon, John (1995). "Soviet Intervention in the Spanish Civil War, 1936–39: A Reexamination". Russian History. 22 (2): 161. doi:10.1163/187633195X00070. ISSN 0094-288X. JSTOR 24657802.

↑ Keene, Judith (2007). Fighting For Franco: International Volunteers in Nationalist Spain During the Spanish Civil War. A&C Black. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-85285-593-2.

↑ Radosh, Ronald; Habeck, Mary R.; Sevostʹi͡anov, G. N., eds. (2001). "Historical Background". Spain Betrayed: The Soviet Union in the Spanish Civil War. Yale University Press. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-300-08981-3.

↑ Bassett, Richard (2012). Hitler's Spy Chief: The Wilhelm Canaris Mystery. Open Road Media. p. 92. ISBN 978-1-4532-4929-1.

↑ Mueller, Michael (2017). Nazi Spymaster: The Life and Death of Admiral Wilhelm Canaris. Skyhorse. p. iii17. ISBN 978-1-5107-1777-0.

1 2 Candil, Anthony J. (2021). Tank Combat in Spain: Armored Warfare During the Spanish Civil War 1936–1939. Casemate. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-61200-971-1.

↑ Hayes 1951, p. 117.

↑ Richardson 2014, p. 12.

↑ Hayes 1951, p. 116.

↑ Payne 2012, p. 154.

↑ MacDougall, Philip (2017). Air Wars 1920–1939: The Development and Evolution of Fighter Tactics. Fonthill Media. pp. 133–135.

↑ Tucker, Spencer C. (2021). Great Sieges in World History: From Ancient Times to the 21st Century. ABC-CLIO. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-4408-6803-0.

↑ Seidman, Michael (2002). Republic of Egos: A Social History of the Spanish Civil War. Univ of Wisconsin Press. pp. 50–51. ISBN 978-0-299-17863-5.

↑ Cazorla-Sanchez, Antonio (2013). Franco: The Biography of the Myth. Routledge. p. 61. ISBN 978-1-134-44949-1.

↑ Kennan, George. Russia and the West under Lenin and Stalin. p. 309.

↑ Whealey, Robert H. (2021). Hitler And Spain: The Nazi Role in the Spanish Civil War, 1936–1939. University Press of Kentucky. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-8131-8275-9.

↑ Documents on German Foreign Policy: 1918–1945 | From the Archives of the German Foreign Ministry. Vol. 12. U.S. Government Printing Office. 1949.

↑ Tucker, Spencer C. (2016). World War II: The Definitive Encyclopedia and Document Collection [5 volumes]: The Definitive Encyclopedia and Document Collection. ABC-CLIO. p. 1982. ISBN 978-1-85109-969-6.

↑ Hayes 1951, pp. 127–128.

↑ Thomas 2013, p. 258.

↑ Thomas 2013, p. 282.

↑ Thomas 2013, p. 421.

↑ Thomas 2013, pp. 423–424.

↑ Thomas 2013, p. 356.

↑ Thomas 2013, pp. 420–422.

1 2 Thomas 2013, p. 424.

↑ Thomas 2013, pp. 689–690.

1 2 Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 193.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 142.

↑ Graham 2002, p. 365.

↑ Meneses, Filipe Ribeiro De (2003). Franco and the Spanish Civil War. Routledge. p. 54. ISBN 978-1-134-55408-9.

↑ Turnbull, Patrick (2013). The Spanish Civil War 1936–39. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 80. ISBN 978-1-4728-0446-4.

↑ Sangster 2018, p. 52.

↑ Cortada, James W. (2014). Modern Warfare in Spain: American Military Observations on the Spanish Civil War, 1936–1939. Potomac Books, Inc. p. 144. ISBN 978-1-61234-101-9.

↑ Coverdale, John F. (2015). Italian Intervention in the Spanish Civil War. Princeton University Press. pp. 117–120. ISBN 978-1-4008-6790-5.

1 2 Jackson 2012, p. 539.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 193–195.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, pp. 147–148.

↑ Alpert 2013, p. 296.

↑ Thomas 2013, p. 242.

↑ Radcliff 2017, p. 203.

↑ Payne 2008, pp. 33–35, 40.

↑ Matthews 2010, p. 354.

↑ Hooton 2019, p. 136.

↑ Graham 1988, pp. 106–107.

↑ Payne 2012, pp. 115–116.

↑ Raguer 2007, p. 206.

↑ Clifford 2020, p. 53.

↑ Riley 2019, p. 114.

↑ Casla 2021, p. 138.

↑ Morcillo 2010, p. 39.

↑ Payne 1961, pp. 68–69.

↑ Payne1999, p. 269.

↑ Payne 1987, p. 172.

↑ Moreno-Luzón & Seixas 2017, pp. 47–48.

↑ Payne 1987, p. 234.

↑ Survey of International Affairs, 1939 (On the Eve of War). Vol. 1. p. 358.

↑ Tremlett 2003.

↑ Fosas Comunes – Los desaparecidos de Franco. La Guerra Civil no ha terminado, El Mundo, 7 July 2002 (in Spanish)

↑ "Aportaremos trozos de verdad a un 'puzzle' que resolverá Garzón", El País, 23 de octubre de 2008.

↑ Juliá & Casanova 1999, pp. 411–412.

↑ Romero Salvadó 2005, p. 277.

↑ Preston 2012, p. xi.

↑ Graham 2002, p. 123.

↑ "Men of La Mancha". Rev. of Antony Beevor, The Battle for Spain. The Economist (22 June 2006).

↑ Ruiz 2007, p. 97.

↑ Caistor, Nick (28 February 2003). "Spanish Civil War fighters look back". BBC News. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

↑ "'Camp Vernet' Website". Cheminsdememoire.gouv.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

↑ "Remembering the 4,427 Spaniards who died at the Mauthausen concentration camp". El Pais.

↑ "Pablo Neruda: The Poet's Calling". Redpoppy.net. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

↑ Bowen 2017, pp. 59–60.

↑ Pike 2008, p. 74.

↑ Goda 1993, pp. 305–308.

↑ Payne 1999, p. 334.

1 2 Rockoff, Hugh; Caruana, Leonard (2000). "A Wolfram in Sheep's Clothing: Economic Warfare in Spain and Portugal, 1940–1944" (PDF). Econstor. Working Paper, No. 2000-08. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 December 2019.

↑ Preston, Paul (1992). "Franco and Hitler: The Myth of Hendaye 1940". Contemporary European History. 1 (1): 1–16 (5). doi:10.1017/s0960777300005038. ISSN 0960-7773. JSTOR 20081423. S2CID 143528356. Archived from the original on 17 May 2013.

↑ Lukacs, John (2001). The Last European War: September 1939 – December 1941. Yale University Press, p. 364. ISBN 0300089155.

↑ Weinberg 2005, p. 133.

↑ Weinberg 2005, p. 177.

↑ Lochner 1948, p. 253, 25 October 1940.

↑ Sager, Murray (July 2009). "Franco, Hitler & the play for Gibraltar: how the Spanish held firm on the Rock". Esprit de Corps. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012.

↑ Pike 2008, p. 48.

↑ Moreno Juliá, Xavier (2018). "Part II - The Volunteers". In Stahel, David (ed.). Joining Hitler's Crusade. Cambridge University Press. pp. 197–198. ISBN 978-1-316-51034-6.

↑ "Batista's Boost". Time. 18 January 1943. Archived from the original on 25 August 2008. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

↑ Golson, Eric (15 June 2011). The Economics of Neutrality: Spain, Sweden and Switzerland in the Second World War (phd). London School of Economics and Political Science. p. 145. This chapter demonstrates that, although nominal trade increased consistently from 1939 to 1943, Germany suffered from increasingly poor terms of trade after 1939, as Spain paid less for its German imports and charged more for its exports. As part of Germany's payment for Spanish resources, Spain was able to exact particularly valuable goods from Germany, including military equipment needed for the German war effort.

1 2 Hayes 1951, p. 151.

1 2 Foreign Relations of the United States Diplomatic Papers · Volume 3. United States. Department of State · 1961. p. 306.

↑ Hayes 1951, pp. 152–153.

↑ Hayes 1951, pp. 150–151.

↑ Messenger, David A. (2020). "Nazis, Real and Imagined, in Post-Second-World-War Spain". In Brenneis, Sara J.; Herrmann, Gina (eds.). Spain, the Second World War, and the Holocaust: History and Representation. University of Toronto Press. p. 494. ISBN 978-1-4875-3251-2.

1 2 3 4 5 Kaufman, Dan (4 December 2025). "We've Got to Kill and Kill and Kill". The New York Review of Books. LXXII, Number 19: 23–25.

↑ Robert Philpot (23 November 2015). "Was Franco the 'good' fascist?". The Jewish Chronicle.

↑ Robert Philpot (6 July 2023). "Far from helping Jews, Franco's regime was implacably hostile". The Jewish Chronicle.

↑ How dictator Franco built his regime vilifying the Jews, then tried to hide it Times of Israel.  JP O'Malley. 5 September 2023.

1 2 "WWII document reveals: General Franco handed Nazis list of Spanish Jews". Haaretz. 22 June 2010. Archived from the original on 24 June 2010.

1 2 Levy 2005, p. 675.

↑ Preston 2020, p. 342.

↑ Payne 2008, p. 232.

↑ Avni 1982.

↑ Alpert 2009.

↑ "Spain" (PDF). yadvashem.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 March 2021.

↑ Setton, Guy. "Spanish–Israeli Relations and Systemic Pressures, 1956–1986: The Cases of GATT, NATO and the EEC". Historia y Politica. 37: 334–5.

1 2 Boxer, Jeffrey (19 June 2017). "The Angel Of Cairo: How A Spaniard Saved Egypt's Jews". The Forward. Retrieved 15 May 2019.

↑ Ederspecial, Richard (17 December 1968). "1492 Ban on Jews Is Voided by Spain". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 May 2019.

↑ Green, David (6 December 2015). "This Day in Jewish History 1968: Spain Revokes the Expulsion of the Jews". Haaretz. Although technically the Inquisition had been dismantled with the passage into law of Spain's constitution of 1869, which abolished religious discrimination, it was not until this 1968 legislation that the regime under Francisco Franco explicitly invited Jews to come and openly practice their faith in Spain.

↑ Bautista Delgado 2009, pp. 303, 321–322.

↑ ISI (10 June 2015). "For Whom the Bell Tolls:[br] The Franco Regime and Contemporary Spain". Intercollegiate Studies Institute. Retrieved 21 November 2025.

↑ Enders, Victoria Lorée; Radcliff, Pamela Beth (1 January 1999). Constructing Spanish Womanhood: Female Identity in Modern Spain. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-4029-2.

↑ Rein 2013, pp. 17–18.

↑ Rodgers 2002, p. 337.

↑ Juliá, Santos (3 November 2015). "El último Azaña". El País (in Spanish). Prisa. Retrieved 3 June 2019.

↑ Pérez Puche, Francisco (October 2016). "Cronología general de la Guerra Civil Española (1936–1939)" (PDF). Oficina de Publicacinoes (in Spanish). Ajuntament de València: 53. Retrieved 3 June 2019.

↑ Payne 1987, pp. 231–234.

↑ Payne 1987, p. 323.

↑ Carrasco-Gallego, José A (2012). "The Marshall Plan and the Spanish postwar economy: a welfare loss analysis". The Economic History Review. 65 (1): 91–119. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0289.2010.00576.x. JSTOR 41475546. S2CID 152384801.

↑ Calvo-Gonzalez, O. (2006). "Neither a Carrot nor a Stick: American Foreign Aid and Economic Policymaking in Spain during the 1950s". Diplomatic History. 30 (3): 409. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.2006.00561.x.

↑ Rubottom & Murphy 1984, p. 87.

↑ "The Franco Years: Policies, Programs, and Growing Popular Unrest". A Country Study: Spain. Library of Congress Country Studies. Archived from the original on 24 January 2002.

↑ Laqueur, Walter (1996) Fascism: Past, Present, Future. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195092457. p. 13

↑ De Meneses, Filipe Ribeiro (2001) Franco and the Spanish Civil War. Routledge. p. 87. ISBN 0415239257.

↑ Gilmour, David (1985) The Transformation of Spain: From Franco to the Constitutional Monarchy. Quartet Books. p. 7. ISBN 070432461X.

↑ Payne 1999, pp. 347, 476.

↑ "fascism, Oxford dictionaries". Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012. Franco in Spain were also Fascist

↑ Blackburn, Simon (2016). "fascism". A Dictionary of Philosophy (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873530-4. Retrieved 21 September 2024.

1 2 3 4 5 Preston, Paul (2005) [1990]. "Resisting modernity: fascism and the military in twentieth century Spain". The Politics of Revenge: Fascism and the Military in Twentieth-Century Spain. Routledge. ISBN 0415120004.

↑ Preston, Paul. "Francisco Franco: is it accurate to call the Spanish dictator a fascist?". HistoryExtra. History Extra – The official website for BBC History Magazine. Retrieved 4 January 2021.

↑ Payne 1999, p. 476.

↑ Payne 1999, pp. 282–283.

↑ Varieties of Anti-Fascism: Britain in the Inter-War Period. Palgrave Macmillan. 2010. p. xviii. ISBN 9780230282674.

↑ Casanova 2010.

↑ Saz Campos 2004, p. 90.

↑ Kornetis, Kostis (2019). "Comparing the Transitions". In Cavallaro, Maria Elena; Kornetis, Kostis (eds.). Rethinking Democratisation in Spain, Greece and Portugal. Springer. p. 72. ISBN 978-3-030-11108-3.

↑ Saz Campos 2004, p. 80.

↑ Martin Blinkhorn (2014). Fascism and the Right in Europe 1919-1945. In the case of the Franco regime, and bearing in mind the fluidity of the Italian Fascist regime itself, it is probably reasonable to suggest that the 1940s represented a 'fascist phase' that then gave way to something more conventionally authoritarian.

↑ Cobo Romero, Francisco (2008). "El franquismo y los imaginarios míticos del fascismo europeo de entreguerras" (PDF). Ayer. 71 (3): 123. ISSN 1134-2277. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2020.

1 2 Sanz Hoya, Julián (2013). "Falangismo y dictadura. Una revisión de la historiografía sobre el fascismo español". In Ruiz Carnicer, Miguel Ángel (ed.). Falange. Las culturas políticas del fascismo en la España de Franco (1936–1975) (PDF). Institución Fernando el Católico. p. 58. ISBN 978-84-9911-216-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 December 2017.

↑ Rodrigo, Javier (2009). "La naturaleza del franquismo: un acercamiento desde la perspectiva comparada de los fascismos europeos" (PDF). Universo de micromundos. VI Congreso de Historia Local de Aragón. Zaragoza: Institución Fernando el Católico. p. 62. ISBN 978-84-9911-005-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 December 2009.

↑ Blinkhorn, Martin (2003). Fascists and Conservatives: The Radical Right and the Establishment in Twentieth-Century Europe. Routledge. ISBN 978-1134997121.

↑ Brenneis, Sara J. (2018). Spaniards in Mauthausen: Representations of a Nazi Concentration Camp, 1940–2015. University of Toronto Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-1-4875-2131-8.

↑ Wilsford, David (1995). Political Leaders of Contemporary Western Europe: A Biographical Dictionary. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 152–153. ISBN 978-0-313-28623-0.

↑ Beevor 2006, p. 405.

↑ Güell, Casilda; Ampuero, Casilda Güell (2006). The Failure of Catalanist Opposition to Franco (1939–1950). Editorial CSIC – CSIC Press. pp. 51–53. ISBN 978-84-00-08473-8.

↑ Mar, Roman (27 October 2007). "Spain Frets Over Future of Flamenco". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2025.

↑ Diéguez, Diego (March 1973). "Spain's golden silence". Index on Censorship. 2 (1): 91. doi:10.1080/03064227308532204. S2CID 143032117.

↑ "Gazeta histórica: Referencia: Páginas TIFF". Boletín Oficial del Estado. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007.

↑ "4862 – 17 julio 1954 – B.O. del E. – Núm. 198". Boletín Oficial del Estado. Archived from the original on 26 June 2008.

↑ González, Javier M.; Máximo, Gabriela (3 September 2023). "Pinochet y Franco: admiración mutua e intercambio de cartas". nuevatribuna.es (in Spanish).

↑ Campos, Alicia (2003). "The Decolonization of Equatorial Guinea: The Relevance of the International Factor". The Journal of African History. 44 (1): 95–116. doi:10.1017/s0021853702008319. hdl:10486/690991. S2CID 143108720.

↑ Collier, Paul (1999). "On the economic consequences of civil war". Oxford Economic Papers. 51: 168–183. doi:10.1093/oep/51.1.168. S2CID 18408517.

↑ Prados de la Escosura 2017, pp. 6, 7, 20.

↑ Martin 1990, pp. 140–141.

↑ Preston, Paul (July 2014). "Four Decades of Triumph and Trials" (PDF). Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Diplomatist. p. 16. Retrieved 18 November 2023.

↑ Tusell, Javier (2011). Spain: From Dictatorship to Democracy. John Wiley & Sons. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-4443-3974-1.

↑ Powell, Charles (2016). Juan Carlos of Spain: Self-Made Monarch. Springer. pp. 36–37, 215–216. ISBN 978-1-349-24423-2.

↑ de la Cierva, Ricardo (1996). Agonia y Muerte de Franco [Agony and Death of Franco] (in Spanish). Eudema Universidad. ISBN 978-8477542179.

1 2 Ellwood (2014), pp. 181–183, 217–219.

↑ Munoz, Heraldo (2008). The Dictator's Shadow: Life Under Augusto Pinochet. Basic Books. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-7867-2604-2.

↑ Wheeler, Duncan (2020). Following Franco: Spanish culture and politics in transition. Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-1-5261-0520-2.

↑ Powell, Charles (2001). "International Aspects of Democratization: The Case of Spain". In Whitehead, Laurence (ed.). The International Dimensions of Democratization: Europe and the Americas (PDF). p. 295. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2019.

↑ Seixas, Xosé M. Núñez (2021). Sites of the Dictators: Memories of Authoritarian Europe, 1945–2020. Routledge. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-000-39702-4.

↑ Cazorla-Sanchez, Antonio (2013). Franco: The Biography of the Myth. Routledge. p. 223. ISBN 978-1-134-44949-1.

↑ Keefe, Eugene K. (1976). Area Handbook for Spain. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. vi. ISBN 978-0-16-001567-0.

↑ Preston 2020, p. 406.

↑ "El Congreso aprueba pedir al Gobierno la exhumación de los restos de Franco del Valle de los Caídos". ELMUNDO (in Spanish). 11 May 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2019.

↑ "Spain to dig up Franco's body after government passes decree". The Independent. 24 August 2018. Retrieved 26 August 2018.

↑ "Spanish parliament votes to exhume remains of dictator Franco". Reuters. 13 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

↑ Junquera, Natalia (3 October 2018). "Franco's family demands dictator be buried with military honors". El País. ISSN 1134-6582. Retrieved 15 March 2019.

↑ Rob Picheta (17 February 2019). "Spanish government gives Franco family ultimatum in effort to exhume dictator's remains". CNN. Retrieved 15 March 2019.

↑ Plaza, Analía (15 March 2019). "Mingorrubio, la antigua colonia franquista donde se enterraría a Franco: "No queremos ser el Valle de los Caídos"". eldiario.es.

↑ "Spain's Supreme Court suspends the planned exhumation of Franco". El Pais. 4 June 2019. Retrieved 30 June 2019.

↑ "Spain to move Franco's remains after court gives go-ahead". The Guardian. 24 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019.

↑ Jone, Sam (23 October 2019). "Franco's remains to finally leave Spain's Valley of the Fallen". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 24 November 2019.

↑ "Confronting its troubled past, Spain exhumes Franco". Reuters. 24 October 2019. Retrieved 26 November 2019.

↑ "Factbox: Reactions to Spain's exhumation of former dictator Franco". Reuters. 24 October 2019. Retrieved 26 November 2019.

↑ Mahamud, Kira (March 2016). "Emotional indoctrination through sentimental narrative in Spanish primary education textbooks during the Franco dictatorship (1939–1959)". History of Education Quarterly. 45 (5): 653–678. doi:10.1080/0046760X.2015.1101168. S2CID 146848487.

↑ Payne & Palacios 2014, p. 501.

↑ Seidman 2011, p. 254.

↑ Stanley G. Payne (1987). The Franco Regime, 1936–1975. Univ of Wisconsin Press. pp. 339–41. ISBN 978-0-299-11070-3.

↑ Wayne H. Bowen (2017). Truman, Franco's Spain, and the Cold War. University of Missouri Press. pp. 60, 70. ISBN 978-0-8262-7384-0.

↑ The pontifical documents of His Holiness Pope Gregory XVII.

↑ Buckley, William F. Jr (1963). Rumbles Left and Right: A Book about Troublesome People and Ideas. Putnam. p. 49.

↑ Krugman, Paul (2009). The Conscience of a Liberal. W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 103, 108. ISBN 978-0-393-06711-8.

↑ Palmer, Alex W. (July 2006). "The Battle Over the Memory of the Spanish Civil War". Smithsonian Magazine. Vol. 49, no. 4. p. 12. Archived from the original on 20 August 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.

↑ Hundley, Tom (3 August 2006). "Spain handles with care memories of its civil war". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 20 August 2018.

↑ Cedéo Alvarado, Ernesto (4 February 2008). "Rey Juan Carlos abochornó a Pinochet". Panamá América. Retrieved 4 April 2016.

↑ "Viudos de Franco homenajearon a Pinochet en España" [Widows of Franco Honour Pinochet in Spain]. La Cuarta (in Spanish). Chile. 18 October 2013. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 20 August 2018.

↑ Michelle Goldberg (5 August 2024). "JD Vance Just Blurbed a Book Arguing That Progressives Are Subhuman". New York Times. Retrieved 6 August 2024.David Gardner (6 August 2024). "Vance Praised Book Calling the Left 'Unhumans' and Praising Dictators". Daily Beast. Retrieved 6 August 2024.Marin Scotten (7 August 2024). "JD Vance blurbed a book by a conspiracy theorist that argues people on the left aren't even human". Salon. Retrieved 6 August 2024.Nathan J. Robinson (31 July 2024). "The Horrifying Fascist Manifesto Endorsed By J.D. Vance". Current Affairs. Retrieved 7 August 2024.

↑ "Europe diary: Franco and Finland". BBC. 6 July 2006. Retrieved 12 August 2025.

↑ "Santander retira la estatua de Franco". El País (in Spanish). 18 December 2008. ISSN 1134-6582. Retrieved 12 August 2025.

↑ Hamilos, Paul (19 October 2007). "Rallies banned at Franco's mausoleum". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 3 January 2010.

↑ Council of Europe: Parliamentary Assembly (2005). Documents: Working Papers, 2004 Ordinary Session (Second Part), 26–30 April 2004, Vol. 3. Council of Europe. p. 135. ISBN 978-92-871-5508-5.

1 2 3 "Primera condena al régimen de Franco en un recinto internacional". El Mundo. Retrieved 12 August 2025.

1 2 3 Galaz & Gómez 2007.

↑ "Spain OKs Reparations to Civil War Victims", Associated Press, 28 July 2006

↑ Politics As Usual? The Trials and Tribulations of The Law of Historical Memory in Spain Archived 5 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Georgina Blakeley (The Open University), 7 September 2008

↑ "Proyecto de Ley por la que se reconocen y amplían derechos y se establecen medidas en favor de quienes padecieron persecución o violencia durante la Guerra Civil y la Dictadura". www.senado.es. Archived from the original on 29 April 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2025.

↑ "Franco's Prisons". www.en.mhcat.cat. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 August 2025.

↑ "El general franquisimo de Vazquez de Sola D'un temps, d'un pais". duntempsdunpais.cat (in Catalan). Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2025.

↑ Royal Library (Madrid) (ed.). "Super-libris of Franco, Francisco (1892-1975)". Ex-libris Database (in Spanish). Retrieved 6 May 2013.

↑ Morales & Alegría 2001.



Sources



Alpert, Michael (2009). "Spain and the Jews in the Second World War". Jewish Historical Studies. 42: 201–210. ISSN 0962-9696. JSTOR 29780130.

Alpert, Michael (2013). The Republican Army in the Spanish Civil War, 1936–1939. Cambridge University Press. p. 296. ISBN 978-1-107-02873-9.

Alpert, Michael (2019). Franco and the Condor Legion: The Spanish Civil War in the Air. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 174. ISBN 978-1-78673-563-8.

Aterrano, Marco Maria; Varley, Karine (2020). "A Fascist Decade of War? The impact of the Italian wars on the international stage, 1935–1945". In Aterrano, Marco Maria; Varley, Karine (eds.). A Fascist Decade of War: 1935–1945 in International Perspective. Routledge. pp. 22–23. ISBN 978-1-351-32998-9.

Avilés Farré, Juan (2006). La izquierda burguesa y la tragedia de la II República (PDF). Madrid: Consejería de Educación, Comunidad de Madrid. pp. 397–398. ISBN 84-451-2881-7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2016.

Avni, Haim (1982). Spain, the Jews, and Franco. Jewish Publication Society of America. ISBN 978-0-8276-0188-8.


Balfour, Sebastian (2002). Deadly Embrace: Morocco and the Road to the Spanish Civil War. OUP Oxford. pp. 52–54. ISBN 978-0-19-155487-2.

Bautista Delgado, Juan (2009). "From Ostracism to a Leading Role – Spain's Foreign Policy Towards the Middle East Since 1939". In Sanford R. Silverburg (ed.). Palestine and International Law: Essays on Politics and Economics. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-4248-5.

Beevor, Antony (2006). The Battle for Spain: The Spanish Civil War 1936–1939. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303765-1.

Bell, P. M. H. (2014). The Origins of the Second World War in Europe. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-86525-4.

Ben-Ami, Shlomo (1981). "Ben-Ami: Catalan and Basque". In Dinstein, Yoram (ed.). Models of Autonomy. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-2884-0.

Bowen, Wayne H. (2017). Truman, Franco's Spain, and the Cold War. University of Missouri Press. pp. 59–60. ISBN 978-0-8262-7384-0.


Saz Campos, Ismael (2004). Fascismo y franquismo (in Spanish). University of Valencia. ISBN 84-370-5910-0.

Casals, Xavier (2006). "Franco 'El Africano'". Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies. 7 (3): 207–224. doi:10.1080/14636200601083990. S2CID 216092331.

Casanova, Julián; Espinosa, Francisco; Mir, Conxita; Gómez, Francisco Moreno (2004). Morir, matar, sobrevivir: la violencia en la dictadura de Franco (in Spanish). Grupo Planeta (GBS). ISBN 978-84-8432-506-2.

Casanova, Julián (2010). The Spanish Republic and Civil War. Cambridge University. ISBN 978-0-521-73780-7.

Casanova, Julián; Andrés, Carlos Gil (2014). Twentieth-Century Spain: A History. Cambridge University Press. p. 238. ISBN 978-1-139-99200-8.

Casla, Koldo (2021). Spain and Its Achilles' Heels: The Strong Foundations of a Country's Weaknesses. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-5381-6459-4.

Castillo, Dennis (2019). Papal Diplomacy from 1914 to 1989: The Seventy-Five Years War. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 92. ISBN 978-1-4985-4649-2.

Ciáurriz, Iker Itoiz (2020). Valencia-García, Louie Dean (ed.). Far-Right Revisionism and the End of History: Alt/Histories. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-000-05407-1.

Clifford, Alexander (2020). The People's Army in the Spanish Civil War: A Military History of the Republic and International Brigades 1936–1939. Pen and Sword Military. p. 53. ISBN 978-1-5267-6095-1.

de la Cueva, Julio (1998). "Religious Persecution, Anticlerical Tradition and Revolution: On Atrocities against the Clergy during the Spanish Civil War". Journal of Contemporary History. 33 (3): 355–369. ISSN 0022-0094. JSTOR 261121.



Ellwood, Sheelagh M. (2014). Franco. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-87467-6.

Evans, Jan E. (2013). Miguel de Unamuno's Quest for Faith: A Kierkegaardian Understanding of Unamuno's Struggle to Believe. Wipf and Stock Publishers. ISBN 978-1-62032-106-5.


Fontana, Josep (2000) [1986]. "Reflexiones sobre la naturaleza y las consecuencias del franquismo". In Fontana, Josep (ed.). España bajo el franquismo (in Spanish). Grupo Planeta (GBS). p. 22. ISBN 978-84-8432-057-9.

Franco Bahamonde, Francisco (2020). Guerra de liberación: Franco inédito (in Spanish). Editorial Almuzara. ISBN 978-84-18089-51-0.


Galaz, Mábel; Gómez, Luis (8 September 2007). "La cosecha del dictador". El País. Archived from the original on 18 February 2012.

García, Roberto Villa; Tardío, Manuel Álvarez (2017). 1936. Fraude y violencia en las elecciones del Frente Popular (in Spanish). Espasa. ISBN 978-84-670-4967-1.

Goda, Norman J. W. (1993). "The Riddle of the Rock: A Reassessment of German Motives for the Capture of Gibraltar in the Second World War". Journal of Contemporary History. 28 (2): 305–308. doi:10.1177/002200949302800205. ISSN 0022-0094. JSTOR 260712. S2CID 159914810.

González Calleja, Eduardo (30 January 2016). "Los discursos catastrofistas de los líderes de la derecha y la difusión del mito del " golpe de Estado comunista "". El Argonauta español. 13 (13). doi:10.4000/argonauta.2412.

Graham, Helen (1988). "The Spanish Popular Front and the Civil War". In Graham, Helen; Preston, Paul (eds.). The Popular Front in Europe. Springer. pp. 106–107. ISBN 978-1-349-10618-9.

Graham, Helen (2002). The Spanish Republic at War 1936–1939. Cambridge University Press. p. 365. ISBN 978-0-521-45932-7.


Habeck, Mary (2002). "The Spanish Civil War and the origins of the Second World War". In Martel, Gordon (ed.). Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered. Routledge. p. 204. ISBN 978-1-134-71417-9.

Hayes, Carlton J.H. (1951). The United States and Spain. An Interpretation (1st ed.). Sheed & Ward. ISBN 978-0837128054. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

Hernández, Carlos Gregorio Hernández (2015). "Spain in the Interwar Period". In Martínez, José Luis Orella; Mizerska-Wrotkowska, Małgorzata (eds.). Poland and Spain in the Interwar and Postwar Period. Schedas. ISBN 978-84-944180-7-5.

Hodges, Gabrielle Ashford (2002). Franco: A Concise Biography. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-28285-1.

Hooton, E. R. (2019). Spain in Arms: A Military History of the Spanish Civil War, 1936–1939. Casemate Publishers. ISBN 978-1-61200-638-3.



Jackson, Gabriel (2012). Spanish Republic and the Civil War, 1931–1939. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-2018-4.

Jensen, Geoffrey (2005). Franco. Soldier, Commander, Dictator. Dulles, VA: Potomac Books, Inc. ISBN 978-1-57488-644-3.

Juliá, Santos; Casanova, Julián (1999). Víctimas de la Guerra Civil (in Spanish). Temas de Hoy. ISBN 978-84-7880-983-7.



Levy, Richard S., ed. (2005). Antisemitism: A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-439-4.

Lochner, Louis P., ed. (1948). The Goebbels Diaries. London: Hamish Hamilton.


Matthews, James (2010). "'Our Red Soldiers': The Nationalist Army's Management of its Left-Wing Conscripts in the Spanish Civil War 1936–9". Journal of Contemporary History. 45 (2): 354. doi:10.1177/0022009409356912. ISSN 0022-0094. JSTOR 20753590. S2CID 153816165.

Martin, Benjamin (1990). "3. The Economy" (PDF). In Solsten, Eric; Meditz, Sandra W.; Keefe, Eugene K. (eds.). Spain: A Country Study. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. ISBN 978-0-16-028550-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 November 2020.

Moradiellos, Enrique (2017). Franco: Anatomy of a Dictator. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78673-300-9.

Morales, Juan; Alegría, José Carlos (31 March 2001). "Standard of the Head of State 1940-1975 (Spain)". Flags of the World. Retrieved 12 August 2012.

Morcillo, Aurora G. (2010). The Seduction of Modern Spain: The Female Body and the Francoist Body Politic. Bucknell University Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-8387-5753-6.

Moreno-Luzón, Javier; Seixas, Xosé M. Núñez (2017). "The Flag and the Anthem". In Moreno-Luzón, Javier; Seixas, Xosé M. Núñez (eds.). Metaphors of Spain: Representations of Spanish National Identity in the Twentieth Century. Berghahn Books. pp. 47–48. ISBN 978-1-78533-467-2.




Patterson, Ian (2007). Guernica and Total War. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-02484-7.

Payne, Stanley G. (1961). Falange: A History of Spanish Fascism. Stanford University Press. pp. 68–69. ISBN 978-0804700580. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

Payne, Stanley G. (1987). The Franco Regime. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0299110703.

Payne, Stanley G. (1993). Spain's First Democracy: The Second Republic, 1931–1936. Univ of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0-299-13674-1.

Payne, Stanley G. (1999). Fascism in Spain, 1923–1977. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0-299-16560-4.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: publisher location (link)

Payne, Stanley G. (2000). The Franco regime, 1936–1975. Phoenix Press. ISBN 978-1-84212-046-0.

Payne, Stanley G. (2008). Franco and Hitler : Spain, Germany, and World War II. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 33–35, 40. ISBN 978-0300122824.

Payne, Stanley G. (2011). The Franco Regime, 1936–1975. University of Wisconsin Pres. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-299-11073-4.

Payne, Stanley (2012). The Spanish Civil War. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 978-0521174701.

Payne, Stanley G.; Palacios, Jesús (2014). Franco: A Personal and Political Biography (4th ed.). University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0299302146.

Pike, David Wingeate (2008). Franco and the Axis Stigma. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-0-230-20544-4.

Prados de la Escosura, Leandro (2017). Spanish Economic Growth, 1850–2015. Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-58042-5.

Preston, Paul (1994). "General Franco as Military Leader". Transactions of the Royal Historical Society. 4. Cambridge University Press: 21–41. doi:10.2307/3679213. ISSN 1474-0648. JSTOR 3679213. S2CID 153836234.

Preston, Paul (1995). Franco: A Biography. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-02515-2.

Preston, Paul (2006). The Spanish Civil War: Reaction, Revolution and Revenge (3rd ed.). London: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-723207-9.

Preston, Paul (2010). "The Theorists of Extermination". In Farrán, Carlos Jerez; Amago, Samuel (eds.). Unearthing Franco's Legacy: Mass Graves and the Recovery of Historical Memory in Spain. University of Notre Dame Press. ISBN 978-0-268-03268-5.

Preston, Paul (2012). The Spanish Holocaust: Inquisition and Extermination in Twentieth-Century Spain. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 266. ISBN 978-0-393-23966-9.

Preston, Paul (2020). A People Betrayed: A History of Corruption, Political Incompetence and Social Division in Modern Spain. Liveright Publishing. ISBN 978-0-87140-870-9.



Radcliff, Pamela Beth (2017). Modern Spain: 1808 to the Present. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-8680-3.

Raguer, Hilari (2007). Gunpowder and Incense: The Catholic Church and the Spanish Civil War. Routledge. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-134-36593-7.

Rein, Raanan (2013). In the Shadow of the Holocaust and the Inquisition: Israel's Relations with Francoist Spain. Routledge. pp. 17–18. ISBN 978-1-135-22190-4.

Richards, Michael (1998). A Time of Silence: Civil War and the Culture of Repression in Franco's Spain, 1936–1945. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-59401-1.

Richardson, R. Dan (2014). Comintern Army: The International Brigades and the Spanish Civil War. University Press of Kentucky. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-8131-6437-3.

Riley, Dylan (2019). The Civic Foundations of Fascism in Europe. Verso Books. ISBN 978-1-78663-524-2.

Rodgers, Eamonn (2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Spanish Culture. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-78859-0.

Romero Salvadó, Francisco J. (2005). The Spanish Civil War: Origins, Course and Outcomes. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1137258922.[permanent dead link]

Romero Salvadó, Francisco J. (2013). Historical Dictionary of the Spanish Civil War. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-8009-2.

Rubottom, R. Richard; Murphy, J. Carter (1984). Spain and the United States: Since World War II. Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-91259-8.

Ruiz, Julius (January 2007). "Defending the Republic: The García Atadell Brigade in Madrid, 1936". Journal of Contemporary History. 42 (1): 97. doi:10.1177/0022009407071625. S2CID 159559553.


Sangster, Andrew (2018). Probing the Enigma of Franco. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-5275-2014-1.

Seidman, Michael (2011). The Victorious Counterrevolution: The Nationalist Effort in the Spanish Civil War. Univ of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0-299-24963-2.

Siaroff, Alan (2013). Comparing Political Regimes: A Thematic Introduction to Comparative Politics, Third Edition. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-1-4426-0702-6.


Taylor, A. J. P. (1996). Origin Of The Second World War. Simon and Schuster. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-684-82947-0.

Thomas, Hugh (2013). The Spanish Civil War (Revised ed.). Random House Publishing. ISBN 978-0060142780.

Tremlett, Giles (1 December 2003). "Spain torn on tribute to victims of Franco". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 2 March 2010.



Villaverde, Angel Luis López (1999). "Indalecio Prieto en Cuenca: comentarios al discurso pronunciado el 1º de mayo de 1936" (PDF). Añil (in Spanish) (19): 16. ISSN 1133-2263. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 23 May 2022.

Vincent, Mary (2007). Spain, 1833–2002: People and State. Oxford University Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-19-873159-7.


Weinberg, Gerhard L. (2005). A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-61826-7.






Further reading



Blinkhorn, Martin (1988). Democracy and Civil war in Spain 1931–1939.  Routledge. ISBN 978-0415006996.

Carroll, Warren H. (2004). The Last Crusade: Spain 1936. Christendom Press. ISBN 978-0931888670.

Cerdá, Néstor (October 2011). "Political Ascent and Military Commander: General Franco in the Early Months of the Spanish Civil War, July–October 1936". Journal of Military History. 75(4) pp. 1125–1157.

DiGiovanni, Lisa (2025). Militarized Masculinity in Spain and Chile: Remembering Violence Through Film and Literature (First hardcover ed.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 9781487562717. OCLC 1482259793.

Franco, Pilar. (1980). Nosotros, Los Franco. La Familia Franco y toda la España contemporánea por un testigo de excepción: la hermana del Caudillo. Espejo de España, Editorial Planeta. 268 Páginas.ISBN 84-320-6431-9

Jerez Mir, Miguel; Luque, Javier (2014). eds. Costa Pinto, António; Kallis, Aristotle. "State and Regime in Early Francoism, 1936–45: Power Structures, Main Actors and Repression Policy". Rethinking Fascism and Dictatorship in Europe. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 176–197. ISBN 978-1137384416.

Lines, Lisa (2017). "Francisco Franco as Warrior: Is It Time for a Reassessment of His Military Leadership?" Journal of Military History 81 (2) pp. 513–534.

Tusell, Javier (1995). Franco, España y la II Guerra Mundial: Entre el Eje y la Neutralidad (in Spanish). Ediciones Temas de Hoy. ISBN 978-8478805013.

Tusell, Javier (1992). Franco en la guerra civil – Una biografia política (in Spanish). Editorial Tusquets. ISBN 978-8472236486.

Tusell, Javier (1996). La Dictadura de Franco (in Spanish). Altaya. ISBN 978-8448706371.


Primary sources

Franco, Francisco. (1922) Marruecos : diario de una bandera. Madrid Pueyo. 434161881.

Hayes, Carlton J. H.  (1945) Wartime mission in Spain, 1942–1945. Macmillan Company. ISBN 978-1121497245.

Hoare, Samuel.  (1946) Ambassador on Special Mission.  UK. Collins. pp. 124–125.

Hoare, Samuel. (1947) Complacent Dictator. A.A. Knopf. ASIN B0007F2ZVU.



External links


Francisco Franco  at Wikipedia's sister projects



Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks


Newspaper clippings about Francisco Franco in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW





Political offices



Preceded byManuel Azañaas President of Spain 
 Head of the Spanish State 1 October 1936 – 20 November 1975
Succeeded byAlejandro Rodríguez de Valcárcelas President of the Regency Council 




Preceded byJuan Negrín
 Prime Minister of Spain 30 January 1938 – 8 June 1973
Succeeded byLuis Carrero Blanco



Links to related articles



v
t
ePrime ministers of Spain
Acting prime ministers shown in italics.
Queen Isabella II(1833–1868)

Martínez de la Rosa

Toreno

Álava

Álvarez Mendizábal

Istúriz

Calatrava

Espartero

Bardají

Heredia-Spínola

Frías

Alaix

Pérez de Castro

A. González

Ferraz

Cortázar

Sancho

Espartero

Ferrer

A. González

Rodil

J. M. López

Gómez Becerra

Olózaga

González Bravo

Narváez

Miraflores

Narváez

Sotomayor

Pacheco

Salamanca

García Goyena

Narváez

Clonard

Bravo Murillo

Roncali

Lersundi

Sartorius

Mendigorría

Rivas

Espartero

O'Donnell

Narváez

Armero

Istúriz

O'Donnell

Arrazola

Mon

Narváez

O'Donnell

Narváez

González Bravo

Havana

Democratic Sexennium(1868–1874)

Madoz

Serrano

Prim

Topete

Serrano

Ruiz Zorrilla

Malcampo

Sagasta

Topete

Serrano

Mendigorría

Ruiz Zorrilla

Figueras

Pi

Salmerón

Castelar

Serrano

Sierra Bullones

Sagasta

The Restoration(1874–1931)

Cánovas

Jovellar

Martínez Campos

Sagasta

Posada

Azcárraga

Silvela

Fernández-Villaverde

Maura

Montero

Moret

López Domínguez

Vega de Armijo

Canalejas

García Prieto

Romanones

Dato

Maura

Sánchez de Toca

Bugallal

Sánchez-Guerra

Primo de Rivera

Berenguer

Aznar-Cabañas

Second Republic(1931–1939)

Alcalá-Zamora

Azaña

Lerroux

Martínez Barrio

Samper

Chapaprieta

Portela

Barcía

Casares

Martínez Barrio

Giral

Largo

Negrín

Spain under Franco(1936–1975)

Franco

Carrero Blanco

Fernández-Miranda

Arias

Since 1975

Arias

Santiago

Suárez

Calvo-Sotelo

F. González

Aznar

Zapatero

Rajoy

Sánchez



v
t
eFranco-Spanish conquest of Morocco (1844–1934)


French protectorate in Morocco

Spanish protectorate in Morocco

Wars

First Franco-Moroccan War (1844)

Hispano-Moroccan War (1859–60)

First Melilla War (1893–94)

Second Franco-Moroccan War (1907–12)

Second Melilla War (1909)

Zaian War (1914–21)

Rif War (1921–26)

Bombardments and battles

Bombardment of Salé (1851)

Bombardment of Casablanca (1907)

Battle of Wolf Ravine (1909)

Bloody Days of Fes (1912)

Battle of Sidi Bou Othman (1912)

Battle of El Ksiba (1913)

Battle of El Herri (1914)

Battle of Annual (1921)

Alhucemas Landing (1925)

Bombardment of Chefchaouen (1925)

Key people
Moroccans

Mohammed Ameziane

Mulai Ahmed er Raisuni

Mouha ou Hammou Zayani

Moha ou Said

Mhand n'Ifrutant

Ali Amhaouch

Sidi Ahmed El Hiba

Ma al-'Aynayn

Abd el-Krim

Assou Oubasslam

Aït Atta

Zayanes

Beni Ouryaghel

French

Charles Mangin

Hubert Lyautey

Paul Prosper Henrys

Joseph-François Poeymirau

Philippe Pétain

Henry de Bournazel

French allies

Thami El Glaoui

Spaniards

Juan García y Margallo

Arsenio Martínez-Campos

José Marina Vega

Manuel Fernández Silvestre

Dámaso Berenguer

José Millán-Astray

Miguel Primo de Rivera

José Sanjurjo

Francisco Franco

Spanish allies

Mohamed Meziane

Treaties

Treaty of Tangier (1844)

Treaty of Wad Ras (1860)

Treaty of Fes (1894)

Algeciras Conference (1906)

Pact of Cartagena (1907)

Morocco–Congo Treaty (1911)

Treaty of Fes (1912)

Franco-Spanish Treaty (1912)

Crises

Tangier Crisis (1905–06)

Agadir Crisis (1911)



v
t
e    Philippine Legion of Honor recipients    
Chief Commander(Punong Komandante)

Emilio Aguinaldo

Hassanal Bolkiah

Chiang Kai-shek

Dwight D. Eisenhower

Francisco Franco

José P. Laurel

Douglas MacArthur

Ferdinand Marcos

Imelda Marcos

Sergio Osmeña

Jesse Robredo

Chino Roces

Franklin D. Roosevelt

Jaime Sin

Achmad Sukarno

Lorenzo Tañada

Maxwell D. Taylor

Claudio Teehankee

Bhumibol Adulyadej

Grand Commander(Marangal na Komandante)

Gilbert Teodoro

Emilio Yap

Fernando Zobel de Ayala

Jaime Zobel de Ayala

Jaime Augusto Zobel de Ayala

Napoleon G. Rama

Grand Officer(Marangal na Pinuno)

Teodoro Locsin Jr.

Commander(Komandante)

Benigno Aquino Jr.

Eulogio Balao

Sotero Cabahug

Leonardo Espina

Alfredo Montelibano Sr.

Officer (Pinuno)

Benigno Aquino Jr.

Manny Pacquiao

Legionnaire(Lehiyonaryo)

Escuadrón 201

Teodoro Locsin Sr.

Geronima Pecson

Edith Nourse Rogers

Richard Sakakida



v
t
ePost-war flight of Axis fugitives
Fugitives
German / Austrian

Franz Abromeit

Ludolf von Alvensleben

Klaus Barbie

Hermine Braunsteiner

Alois Brunner

Adolf Eichmann

Hans Eisele

Aribert Heim

Walter Kutschmann

Johann von Leers

Josef Mengele

Hermann Michel

Erich Priebke

Walter Rauff

Eduard Roschmann

Walter Schreiber

Horst Schumann

Josef Schwammberger

Franz Stangl

Gustav Wagner

Croatian

Milivoj Ašner

Andrija Artuković

Anton Geiser

Vjekoslav Luburić

Ante Pavelić

Ivo Rojnica

Dinko Šakić

Vjekoslav Vrančić

Belgian

Pierre Daye

Léon Degrelle

René Lagrou

Ukrainian

John Demjanjuk

Feodor Fedorenko

Mykola Lebed

Danish

Søren Kam

Carl Værnet

Estonian

Aleksander Laak

Karl Linnas

Latvian

Viktors Arājs

Herberts Cukurs

Other nationalities

Tscherim Soobzokov (Circassian)

Aarne Kauhanen (Finnish)

Assistance
Organizations

Ratlines

State involvement

Colonia Dignidad (Chile)

Franco (Spain)

Nasser (Egypt)

Perón (Argentina)

Videla (Argentina)

Operation Paperclip (USA)

list of scientists

Operation Osoaviakhim (USSR)

list of scientists

Robert Leiber (Holy See)

Banzer (Bolivia)

Stroessner (Paraguay)

Ustaše in Australia

Other persons

Rodolfo Freude

Alois Hudal

Charles Lescat

Hans-Ulrich Rudel

Otto Skorzeny

Hunters

Serge Klarsfeld & Beate Klarsfeld

Eli Rosenbaum

Simon Wiesenthal

Efraim Zuroff

Disputed / dubious

Krunoslav Draganović

ODESSA

Stille Hilfe

Die Spinne

Nazi gold

See also

Pursuit of Nazi collaborators

List of last surviving people suspected of participation in Nazi war crimes



v
t
eFascism

Core tenets

Actual idealism

Aestheticization of politics

Anti-communism

Anti-materialism

Anti-pacifism

Authoritarianism

Chauvinism

Class collaboration

Conspiracism

Corporatism

Cult of personality

Dictatorship

Direct action

Dirigisme

Economic interventionism

Eugenics

Heroic capitalism

Heroic realism

Heroism

Imperialism

Indoctrination

Irrationalism

Machismo

Masculinity

Militarism

National syndicalism

Nationalism

Integral

Palingenetic

Ultra

New Man

One-party state

Perpetual war

Populism

Proletarian nation

Propaganda

Racism

Reactionary modernism

Social Darwinism

Social interventionism

Social order

State capitalism

Statolatry

Supercapitalism

Syncretism

Third Position

Totalitarianism

Topics

Definitions

Economics

Fascism and ideology

Fascism worldwide

Symbolism

Lists

British fascist parties

Fascist movements by country (A–F

G–M

N–T

U–Z)

Secretaries of Italian fascist parties

Related

Anti-fascism

Criticism of fascism

Fascist (epithet)

Fascist mysticism

Feudal fascism

Morenazi

Para-/semi-fascism

Post-fascism

Proto-fascism

Red fascism

Red–green–brown alliance

Roman salute

Sansepolcrismo

Social fascism

Sorelianism

Synarchism


Variants


Arab

Argentine

Nacionalismo

Austrian

Brazilian

British

Christian

Christian Identity

Mexican synarchism

Clerical

Crypto

Eco

English

Falangism

French

Doriotism

Pétainism

Neo-Pétainism

Jeune Nation

L'Œuvre Française

Valoisism

Hindu

Hungarian

Hutu

Ilminism

Irish

Islamic

Ziaism

Israeli/Zionist

Revisionist Maximalism

Italian

Intransigent

Japanese

Emperor-system

Statism

Restoration

Ultra

Techno

Korean

Latvian

Mystical

Nazism

Austrian

Esoteric

Hitlerism

Neo-Nazism

Russian

Strasserism

Swedish

Neo

Finnish

NRx

Pan-Turkic

Rexism

Polish

Romanian

Legionarism

Neo-Legionarism

Romanianism/Stelism

Russian

Neo-Eurasianism

Syndicalist

Syrian Social Nationalism

Third Positionism

National-anarchism

National Bolshevism

Nazi-Maoism

Uruguayan

Sosism

Ustašism


Movements

Africa

Coalition for the Defence of the Republic

Greyshirts

Muslim Association of the Lictor

National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Ossewabrandwag

Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines

Republican Democratic Movement

Young Egypt Party (1933)

Asia

Abhinav Bharat

Al-Muthanna Club

Aria Party

Azerbaijan National Democrat Party

Azure Party

Black Dragon Society

Brit HaBirionim

Concordia Association

Grey Wolves

Golden Square

Hindu Mahasabha

Iran-e-No Party

Kach

Kataeb Party

Kenkokukai

Kokumin Dōmei

Korea Nationalist Party

Korean National Youth Association

Lehi

Liberal Party (South Korea)

Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf

National Socialism Association

Nationalist Movement Party

National Will Party

Nation Party of Iran

Otzma Yehudit

Pan-Iranist Party

Palestine Arab Party

Progress Party (Iran)

Philippine Falange

Rastakhiz Party

Rastriya Prajatantra Party

Reform bureaucrats

Religious Zionist Party

Sakurakai

Sangh Parivar

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad

Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal

Bharatiya Janata Party

Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha

Bharatiya Jana Sangh

Bharatiya Kisan Sangh

Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh

Bharat Vikas Parishad

Ekal Vidyalaya

Hindu Makkal Katchi

Hindu Munnani

Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh

Jammu Praja Parishad

Muslim Rashtriya Manch

Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas

Rashtra Sevika Samiti

Rashtriya Sikh Sangat

Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh

Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana

Seva Bharati

Vidya Bharati

Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram

Vishva Hindu Parishad

Bajrang Dal

Durga Vahini

SUMKA

Syrian Social Nationalist Party

Tōhōkai

Tsagaan Khas

Turkish Union Party

Wang Jingwei Kuomintang

Northern / Northwestern Europe

Academic Karelia Society

Ailtirí na hAiséirghe

Autonome Nationalisten

Bases Autónomas

Black Front (Netherlands)

Blueshirts

Breton Social-National Workers' Movement

British Democratic Party

British Fascists

Britain First

British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women

British Movement

British National Party (1960)

British National Party

British People's Party (1939)

British People's Party (2005)

British Union of Fascists

The Britons

La Cagoule

Casuals United

Centre Party '86

Clerical People's Party

Dutch Defence League

Dutch Fascist Union

English Defence League

European Defence League

English National Association

Le Faisceau

Fédération d'action nationale et européenne

Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation

Finnish People's Organisation

Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party

Flemish National Union

French National-Collectivist Party

French Nationalist Party

French Popular Party

General Dutch Fascist League

Greater Britain Movement

Groupe Collaboration

Heathen Front

Imperial Fascist League

International Third Position

Jeune Nation

Lalli Alliance of Finland

Lapua Movement

League of Saint George

Les Identitaires

Mouvement d'Action Civique

Mouvement Franciste

Nasjonal Samling

National Alliance (Sweden)

National Corporate Party

National Fascisti

National Front (UK)

National League of Sweden

Nationalist Party

National Popular Rally

National Rally

National Syndicalists

National Union (Netherlands)

National Union (Portugal)

New Party

Nipsters

Nordic League

Nordic Resistance Movement

Northern League

Norwegian Defence League

Nouvelle Droite

L'Œuvre Française

Official National Front

Order of Flemish Militants

Organisation of National Socialists

Parti Communautaire National-Européen

Party of Finnish Labor

Party of the Swedes

Patriotic Alternative

Patriotic People's Movement

Patriotic People's Movement (1993)

Pērkonkrusts

Phalange Française

Ragnarock

Rebelles Européens

Rexist Party

Rising Finland

Scottish Democratic Fascist Party

Scottish Protestant League

Skrewdriver

Skullhead

Stormers

Terre et Peuple

Third Way (France)

Third Way (UK)

Union Movement

Verdinaso

Vigrid

White Aryan Resistance

Central Europe

Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists

Arrow Cross Party

Artgemeinschaft

Austrian Nazism

Black Front (Germany)

Bund Deutscher Osten

Christian National Socialist Front

Deutsche Reichspartei

Eidgenössische Sammlung

Falanga

Free German Workers' Party

German Faith Movement

German National Movement in Liechtenstein

German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia)

German Party (Slovakia)

German Social Union

Honor

Hungarian National Front

Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party

Hungarian National Socialist Party

Combat League of German Socialists

Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia

Landser

Liechtenstein Homeland Service

National Democratic Party (Austria)

National Democratic Party of Germany

National Fascist Community

National Front (Hungary)

National Front (Switzerland)

National Movement of Switzerland

National Radical Camp

National Radical Camp (1993)

National Revival of Poland

National Union (Switzerland)

Nationalist Front (Germany)

Nazi Party

Greater German People's Community

Nazi Germany

National Socialist Freedom Movement

National Socialist Working Association

New Order

Nipsters

No Colours Records

PC Records

Positive Christianity

German Christians

Republic Movement

The Right (Germany)

Rock-O-Rama Records

Shield and Sword

Slovak People's Party

Socialist Reich Party

Stahlgewitter

Sudeten German Party

Szeged Idea

The Third Path

United Hungarian National Socialist Party

Vlajka

Völkisch movement

Volksdeutsche Bewegung

Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit

Wiking-Jugend

Southern Europe

ADÑ–Spanish Identity

Albanian Fascist Party

Balli Kombëtar

Brothers of Italy

CEDADE

Democratic Fascist Party

European Nation State

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Fasci Italiani di Combattimento

Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Falange

Sección Femenina

La Falange (1999)

Falange Auténtica

Falange Española

Falange Española Auténtica

Falange Española de las JONS

Falange Española de las JONS (1976)

Falange Española Independiente

Falangist Movement of Spain

Freethinkers' Party

Imperium Europa

Italian fascism

National Fascist Party (Italy)

Italian Social Republic

Republican Fascist Party

Italian Social Movement

Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista

Juntas Españolas

National Alliance (Spain)

National Alliance July 18

National Democracy (Italy)

National Democracy (Spain)

National Front (Spain, 1986)

National Front (Spain, 2006)

National Future

National Union (Italy, 1923)

National Union (Spain)

New Force (Italy)

New Force (Spain)

Republican Social Movement

The Right (Italy)

Sammarinese Fascist Party

Spanish Military Union

Struggle of the People

Student Action

Terza Posizione

Tricolour Flame

Unidad Falangista Montañesa

Youth Front

Eastern and Southeastern Europe

Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights

Bosnian Movement of National Pride

Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party

Croatian Liberation Movement

Croatian National Resistance

Croatian Party of Rights

Crusade of Romanianism

ELAM (Cyprus)

Ethnic National Union

Eurasia Movement

Eurasia Party

Format18

For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action

German Party

German People's Party

Golden Dawn

Greek National Socialist Party

Hosank

Iron Guard

Kolovrat

LEPEN

Liberal Democratic Party of Russia

Lithuanian Nationalist Union

National Agrarian Party

National Bolshevik Front

National Bolshevik Party

National-Christian Defense League

National Christian Party

National Fascist Movement

National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement

National Party – Greeks

National Socialist Patriotic Organisation

National Socialist Society

National Social Movement

National Romanian Fascio

National Renaissance Front

National Salvation Front

Nokturnal Mortum

Obraz

Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists

Pamyat

Patriotic Alliance

People's Party

Ratniks (Bulgaria)

Romanian Front

Russian Imperial Movement

Russian Fascist Party

Russian Women's Fascist Movement

Serbian Action

Serbian Radical Party

Steel Shield

Svoboda

Union of Bulgarian National Legions

Ustaše

Ustaše in Australia

Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood

Yugoslav Radical Union

ZBOR

North America

Fascism in Canada

Aryan Guard

Canadian Association for Free Expression

Canadian Union of Fascists

Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform

Heritage Front

Parti national social chrétien

Fascism in the United States

American Front

American Nazi Party

Fascist League of North America

Identity Evropa

League of the South

National Unity Party of Canada

Nationalist Social Club-131

Nationalist Front (United States)

Patriot Front

Proud Boys

Rise Above Movement

Silver Legion of America

Christian Party (United States, 1930s)

Traditionalist Worker Party

Trumpism

Donald Trump and fascism

Vanguard America

Volksfront

Revolutionary Mexicanist Action

Mexican Democratic Party

Mexican Fascist Party

National Pro Patria Party

National Synarchist Union

Nationalist Front of Mexico

Oceania

Action Zealandia

Antipodean Resistance

Australia First Movement

Australia First Party

Australian Defence League

Australian National Socialist Party

Centre Party

Lads Society

National Action (Australia)

National Socialist Network

National Socialist Party of Australia

Progressive Nationalist Party

Reclaim Australia

True Blue Crew

United Patriots Front

South America

Agrarian Labor Party

Argentine Anticommunist Alliance

Argentine Fascist Party

Argentine Nationalist Action

Argentine Patriotic League

Bolivian Socialist Falange

Bolsonarism

Brazilian Integralism

Brazilian Integralist Action

Brazilian Integralist Front

Falangism in Latin America

Iron Guard (Argentina)

Nacionalismo

National Fascist Party (Argentina)

National Fascist Union

Nationalist Liberation Alliance

National Liberation Movement

National Socialist Movement of Chile

National Universitary Concentration

New Triumph Party

Patriot Front (Argentina)

Popular Dignity

Popular Freedom Alliance

Popular Representation Party

Popular Socialist Vanguard

Republican League

La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia

Revolutionary Union

Tacuara Nationalist Movement


People

Australia

Campbell (Eric)

Campbell (Graeme)

Cottrell

Groot

Mills

Saleam

Austria

Dollfuss

Miklas

Pfrimer

Planetta

Schuschnigg

Seyss-Inquart

Starhemberg

Belgium

Daye

Declercq

Degrelle

Denis

Elias

Eriksson

Hermans

Lagrou

Poulet

Severen

Streel

van de Wiele

Croatia

Boban

Francetić

Kraljević

Kvaternik

Luburić

Pavelić

Pavičić

Rover

Servatzy

Finland

Helanen

Isotalo

Kalsta

Konkka

Kosola

Orko

Simojoki

Somersalo

Törni

Varjonen

France

Augier

Bardèche

Benoist-Méchin

Béraud

Brasillach

Bucard

Châteaubriant

Déat

Déroulède

Dior

Doriot

La Rochelle

Lagardelle

Laval

Pétain

Rebatet

Valois

Vial

Germany

Abetz

Andrae

Baeumler

Berchtold

Berger

Best

Brunner

Bühler

Darré

Falkenhausen

Hocke

Feder

Forster

Frank

Franz V

Gesche

Goebbels

Göring

Graf

Greiser

Günther

Hanke

Heiden

Hess

Heydrich

Himmler

Hitler

Klintzsch

Kuhn

Ludendorff

Maurice

Müller

Niekisch

Ploetz

Rahn

Reitsch

Renthe-Fink

Ribbentrop

Rieger

Rosenberg

Schmitt

Schreck

Skorzeny

Strasser (Gregor)

Strasser (Otto)

Streicher

Terboven

Thadden

Krosigk

Zündel

Greece

Dragoumis

Kasidiaris

Koryzis

Lagos

Michaloliakos

Papadopoulos

India

Adityanath

Advani

Bose

Godse

Golwalkar

Hedgewar

Mukherjee

Savarkar

Vajpayee

Iran

Forouhar

Kashani

Monshizadeh

Pezeshkpour

Teymourtash

Israel

Ahimeir

Ben-Ari

Ben-Gvir

Eldad

Eliyahu

Goldstein

Gopstein

Ha'ivri

Kahane

Marzel

Natan-Zada

Italy

Acerbo

Alfieri

Ambris

D'Annunzio

Azara

Badoglio

Balbo

Torrente Ballester

Bastianini

Bianchi

Boni

Bono

Boselli

Bottai

Ciano (Costanzo)

Ciano (Galeazzo)

Cogni

Corradini

Freda

Gentile

Giuriati

Gozi

Grandi

Graziani

Guidi

Malaparte

Marinetti

Michels

Morgagni

Mussolini

Olivetti

Panunzio

Papini

Pavolini

Rauti

Ricci

Ridruejo

Rocco

Rossoni

Sarfatti

Soffici

Spirito

Volpi

Japan

Akao

Araki

Chō

Hashimoto

Honjō

Kita

Kodama

Matsuoka

Nakano

Nonaka

Ōkawa

Sasakawa

Romania

Antonescu

Bacaloglu

Codreanu

Crainic

Cuza

Gigurtu

Goga

Manoilescu

Moța

Ogoranu

Sima

Russia

Astroŭski

Borovikov

Ilyin

Kaminski

Martsinkevich

Milchakov

Oktan

Rodzaevsky

Spain

Arrese

Bau Nolla

Bilbao Eguía

Carrero Blanco

Fernández-Cuesta

Franco

Franco y Polo

Giménez Caballero

Primo de Rivera

Ramos

Sánchez Mazas

Serrano Suñer

Ukraine

Dontsov

Klyachkivsky

Lebed

Samchuk

Shukhevych

Stetsko

Tyahnybok

United Kingdom

Beckett

Chamberlain

Chesterton

Lake

Leese

Mosley (Diana)

Mosley (Oswald)

Pankhurst

Pearson

Ramsay

Robinson

Southgate

Tyndall

Vaughan-Henry

Wellesley

United States

Auernheimer

Collins

Fuentes

Joyce

Pelley

Pound

Yockey

Other

Celmiņš

Martínez

Perón

Quisling

Ramírez

Riva-Agüero y Osma

Šešelj

Szálasi

Yeivin


Works

Literature

1776 Returns

La Conquista del Estado

The Culture of Critique

Defiance

The Doctrine of Fascism

Essentials of Hindutva

Fascist Manifesto

For My Legionaries

The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia

The Fourth Political Theory

Hitlers Zweites Buch

Hutu Ten Commandments

Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics

An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus

Kokutairon and Pure Socialism

The Last Will of a Russian Fascist

Manifesto of Race

Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals

Mein Kampf

My Autobiography

My Life

The Myth of the Twentieth Century

OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World

Protestantische Rompilger

A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century

Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews

A Warning to the Hindus

Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals

Action

Ajan Suunta

L'Alba

El Alcázar

The American Review

Der Angriff

Arriba

The Blackshirt

La Conquista del Estado

Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung

Das Deutsche Mädel

La Difesa della Razza

Eleftheros Kosmos

The European

Fashist

Fashizmi

La France au travail

Fritt Folk

Fronten

Gândirea

Gioventù Fascista

Golden Dawn

Hamaas

Hrvatski Domobran

Je suis partout

Kangura

Kansallissosialisti

Kesari

Limonka

Masada2000

Münchener Beobachter

Nash Put'

Nástup

Nation Europa

Neue Anthropologie

Neues Volk

Het Nieuwe Volk

Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift

Novopress

Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift

Organiser

Panchjanya

Panzerbär

Parole der Woche

Le Pays Réel

Der Pimpf

Il Popolo d'Italia

Das Reich

Revue d'histoire du fascisme

Das Schwarze Korps

Sfarmă-Piatră

Signal

Siniristi

Spearhead

Der Stürmer

Türkische Post

Der Umbruch

Vairas

Vlajka

Volk en Staat

Völkischer Beobachter

Die Wehrmacht

Wochenspruch der NSDAP

Film

L'Armata Azzurra

Bengasi

Condottieri

The Daughter of the Samurai

Erbkrank

Europa: The Last Battle

The Great Appeal

The Old Guard

Raza

Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal

Der Sieg des Glaubens

The Siege of the Alcazar

Lo squadrone bianco

Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht

Triumph of the Will

Music

Fashwave

Hindutva pop

National Socialist black metal

Nazi punk

Rock Against Communism

Other

Allach

StoneToss

Related topics

Art of the Third Reich

Fascist architecture

Heroic realism

Nazi architecture

Nazism and cinema


History



pre-1922

1922–1945

1945–present

1900s

Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust

1910s

Arditi

Fascio

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Armenian genocide and the Holocaust

1920s

March on Rome

Corfu incident

Acerbo Law

Beer Hall Putsch

Aventine Secession

Italian economic battles

Le Faisceau

28 May 1926 coup d'état

Libyan genocide

1930s

March of the Iron Will

November 1932 German federal election

March 1933 German federal election

Enabling Act

Austrian Civil War

July Putsch

1934 Montreux Fascist conference

Romani Holocaust

4th of August Regime

Anti-Comintern Pact

Spanish Civil War

1940s

World War II

Nazi crimes against the Polish nation

The Holocaust

Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia

End in Italy

Nuremberg Trials

Tokyo Trials



Category



v
t
eConservatism
Principles

Ancestral worship

Aristocracy

Authority

Traditional

Class collaboration

Consociationalism

Clericalism

Collective identity

Confessionalism

Cultural assimilation

Cultural heritage

Cultural values

Culture of life

Pro-Life

Discipline

Duty

Noblesse oblige

Ethical order

Familialism

Family values

Fundamentalism

Gender role

Complementarianism

Honour

Imperialism

Loyalty

Meritocracy

Monarchism

Royalist

Nationalism

State

Natural law

Natural Order

Norms

Conventions

Customs

Mores

Ordered liberty

Organicism

Organized religion

Orthodoxy

Patriotism

Philosophical realism

Moral realism

Private property

Protectionism

Public morality

Rule of law

Social hierarchy

Social institutions

Social order

Solidarity

Sovereignty

State religion

Stewardship

Subsidiarity

Tradition

History

Ancien régime

Bourbon Restauration

Congress of Vienna

Concert of Europe

Conservative Order

Counter-Enlightenment

German Romanticism

Holy Alliance

Ultra-royalism

Types

Authoritarian

Black

Corporatist

Cultural

Feminist

Fiscal

Green

LGBTQ

Left

Liberal

Moderate

National

Paternalistic

Populist

Pragmatic

Progressive

Reactionary

Religious

Social

Traditionalist

Ultra

Religion

Christian democracy

Christian politics

Theonomy

Christian right

Theoconservatism

Confucianism

Hindu nationalism

Jewish conservatism

Religious Zionism

Islamism

Islamic economics

Theravada

Buddhist economics

Traditionalist Catholicism

Catholic social teaching

Distributism

Integralism

Ultramontanism

Traditionalist School

By region
Asia
China

Chiangism

Confucianism

Neo

New

Dai Jitao Thought

Neoauthoritarianism

India

Hindutva

Integral humanism

Iran

Khomeinism

Khameneism

Monarchist

Pahlavism

Principlist

Israel

Fundamentalist

Jewish

Kahanism

Zionism

Neo

Religious

Revisionist

Japan

Kokkashugi

Minzoku

Neo

Nippon Kaigi

State Shinto

South Korea

Ilminism

New Right

Turkey

Democratic

Erdoğanism

Great East

Idealism

Millî Görüş

Neo-Ottomanism

Özalism

Other

Bangladesh

Hong Kong

Malaysia

Pakistan

Ziaism

Singapore

Taiwan

Chiangism

Europe
France

Action Française

Bonapartism

Gaullism

Integral nationalism

Legitimism

Maurrassisme

Nouvelle Droite

Orléanism

Révolution nationale

Sarkozysm

Ultra-royalism

Germany

Agrarian

Hegelian

Historical School

Neue Rechte

Ordoliberalism

Prussianism

Cameralistic

Socialist

Revolutionary

Young

Ritter School

Romanticism

State Socialism

Völkisch

Italy

Berlusconism

Historical Right

Italian school of elitism

Neo-Bourbonism

Sanfedismo

Poland

Golden Liberty

Kaczyzm

Monarchist

National Democracy

Sarmatism

Russia

Duginism

Eurasianism

Monarchist

Black-hundredism

Tsarism

Putinism

Slavophilia

Pochvennichestvo

Spain

Alfonsism

Carlism

Carloctavismo

Carlo-francoism

Francoism

National Catholicism

Integrism

Mellismo

Maurism

Neocatholicism

Noucentisme

UnitedKingdom

Cameronism

Civic

Compassionate

Muscular liberalism

Jacobitism

Neo-Jacobite Revival

Neo

One-nationism

Powellism

Thatcherism

Toryism

High

Red

Social

Other

Austria

Belgium

Rexism

Czech Republic

Klausism

Denmark

Finland

Georgia

Monarchist

Greece

Metaxism

Populist

Hungary

Orbanism

Iceland

Luxembourg

Netherlands

Norway

Portugal

Miguelist

Integralismo Lusitano

Romania

Monarchist

Serbia

Monarchist

Sweden

Switzerland

Ukraine

North America
Canada

Clerico-nationalism

Monarchist

Populist

Trumpism

Social

Toryism

Blue

Red

Pink

UnitedStates

Compassionate

Black

Hispanic and Latino

Libertarian

Fusionism

Paleo

Tea Party

Movement

Neo

Old Right

Paleo

Reaganism

Social

Traditionalist

Trumpism

Mexico

Cristero

Monarchist

Oceania
Australia

Hansonism

Liberal Party factions

Centre Right

National Right

Other

New Zealand

South America
Argentina

Federal Peronism

Maurrasismo

Menemism

Nacionalismo

Orthodox Peronism

Brazil

Bolsonarism

Coronelism

Integralism

Janismo

Monarchist

Patrianovism

Populism

Chile

Gremialismo

Pinochetism

Other

Colombia

Rojismo

Uribism

Paraguay

Cartismo

Peru

Fujimorism

 Odriismo

Uruguay

Monarchist

Riverism

Ruralismo

Venezuela

Perezjimenismo

Organisations

European Conservatives and Reformists Party

European People's Party

Identity and Democracy

International Democrat Union

International Monarchist League

Muslim Brotherhood

Tradition, Family, Property

People
Intellectuals

Bainville

Barruel

Belloc

Bonald

Buckley Jr.

Burke

Burnham

Carlyle

Chateaubriand

Chesterton

Coleridge

Comte

Cortés

Dávila

Dostoevsky

Eliot

Evola

Fardid

Gentz

Golwalkar

Haller

Hitchens

Hume

Iorga

Johnson

Jünger

Karamzin

Kirk

Kuehnelt-Leddihn

La Mennais

Le Bon

Le Play

Leontiev

Lewis

Maistre

Mansfield

Maurras

Menéndez

More

Motahhari

Müller

Newman

Nisbet

Novalis

Oakeshott

Corrêa de Oliveira

Peterson

Ranke

Renan

Rivarol

Röpke

Santayana

Savarkar

Savigny

Schlegel

Schmitt

Scruton

Solzhenitsyn

Sowell

Spann

Spengler

Stahl

Strauss

Taine

Tocqueville

Upadhyaya

Uvarov

Voegelin

Politicians

Abe

Adams

Adenauer

Andreotti

Berlusconi

Bismarck

Bolsonaro

GW Bush

Canning

Chiang

Churchill

Diefenbaker

Disraeli

Dmowski

Dollfuss

Erdoğan

Franco

Fujimori

de Gaulle

Harper

Horthy

John Paul II

Kaczyński

Khamenei

Khomeini

Kohl

Le Pen

Lee

Macdonald

Mannerheim

Marcos

Maurras

Menzies

Metaxas

Metternich

Mobutu

Modi

Netanyahu

Orbán

Park

Pérez Jiménez

Pinochet

Pitt

Powell

Prat de la Riba

Putin

Reagan

Salazar

Salisbury

Smith

Stolypin

Suharto

Thatcher

Trujillo

Trump

Vajpayee

de Valera

Zia

Zemmour

Related
Ideologies

Agrarianism

Clerical fascism

Communitarianism

Conservative liberalism

Corporatism

Localism



Anti-communism

Anti-gender movement

Anti-Masonry

Aristocracy

Desecularization

Postsecularism

Conservative wave

Counter-revolutionary

Elite theory

Ethnopluralism

Neo-feudalism

Neo-medievalism

Opposition to LGBTQ rights

Para-fascism

Political Evangelicalism in Latin America

Political theology

Qutbism

Radical right

Europe

United States

Reactionary

Neo-

Right realism

Right-wing politics

Authoritarianism

New

European

Small-c conservatives



Conservatism portal

Politics portal


Authority control databases 
International
ISNI
2
VIAF
2
GND
FAST
WorldCat
National
United States
France
BnF data
Japan
Italy
2
Czech Republic
Spain
Portugal
Netherlands
Norway
Latvia
Chile
Greece
Sweden
Poland
Vatican
Israel
Catalonia
Artists
MusicBrainz
RKD Artists
FID
People
Trove
Deutsche Biographie
DDB
Other
IdRef
Open Library
NARA
SNAC
Te Papa (New Zealand)
Yale LUX















































Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francisco_Franco&oldid=1378712189"
					Categories: 
Francisco Franco
1892 births
1975 deaths
20th-century prime ministers of Spain
20th-century regents
20th-century Roman Catholics
20th-century Spanish military personnel
Burials at Mingorrubio Cemetery
Collaborators with Fascist Italy
Critics of Freemasonry
FET y de las JONS politicians
Francoism
Generalissimos
Heads of state of Spain
Leaders of political parties in Spain
Leaders who took power by coup
Palmarian saints
People from Ferrol
People of the Cold War
People with Parkinson's disease
Perpetrators of political repression in Francoist Spain
Perpetrators of political repression in the Second Spanish Republic
Politicide perpetrators
Prime ministers of Spain
Regents of Spain
Spanish anti-communists
Spanish collaborators with Nazi Germany
Spanish conspiracy theorists
Spanish military personnel of the Rif War
Spanish military personnel of the Spanish Civil War (National faction)
Spanish monarchists
Spanish nationalists
Spanish politicians with disabilities
Spanish traditionalist Catholics
World War II political leaders
Spanish fascistsHidden categories: 
Articles with short description
Short description is different from Wikidata
Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism
Use dmy dates from October 2025
Use British English from August 2023
All Wikipedia articles written in British English
CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)
All pages needing factual verification
Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2025
Pages with Spanish IPA
All articles with unsourced statements
Articles with unsourced statements from April 2026
Articles with Spanish-language sources (es)
CS1 French-language sources (fr)
CS1: unfit URL
Wikisource templates with missing id
Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2022
CS1: long volume value
Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2025
Articles needing additional references from September 2020
All articles needing additional references
Articles containing Spanish-language text
Articles containing Basque-language text
Webarchive template wayback links
CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca)
CS1 errors: ISBN date
CS1 maint: publisher location
All articles with dead external links
Articles with dead external links from May 2023
Articles with permanently dead external links
Pages using Sister project links with default search
Articles containing French-language text
Articles containing German-language text
Articles containing Italian-language text
				
			
			
		
		
			
				
	
 This page was last edited on 5 October 2026, at 20:40 (UTC).
	
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
	
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


				
	
Privacy policy
	
About Wikipedia
	
Disclaimers
	
Contact Wikipedia
	
Legal & safety contacts
	
Code of Conduct
	
Developers
	
Statistics
	
Cookie statement
	
Mobile view


				
	

	



			
		
	 
 

	
		
			
				

Search
			
		
			
		
			
				
					
						
							
								
								
							
							
						
						Search
					
				
			
		
		
				
						
					
						
						

Toggle the table of contents
						
						
					
						
						
					
						
					
			
				Francisco Franco
			
		
		
			
				


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
		
			
				

117 languages
			
			

Add topic
			
		
			
				
				
			
		
	


	
		
	




