1 
 
 
THURSDAY, 8 MAY 2025  
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE WESTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL PARLIAMENT  
 
The  sign † indicates the original language and [ ] directly thereafter indicates 
a translation . 
 
[Hybrid Sitting held with some members present in the House  and some in 
virtual attendance through Microsoft Teams]  
 
The  House  met at 14:15.  
 
The  hon Speaker took the Chair and read the prayer.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Please be seated . [Interjection] Order ! H on member s, be fore 
we proceed I would like to remind you about some of the logistical 
arrangements . A s has been our practise to date , h on members will participate 
in the Sitting of the House  both from here in  the Chamber with the Presiding 
Officer  and the Table Staff,  and via Microsoft Teams , and ou r Standing Rules  
have accordingly been amended to accommodate such hybrid Si ttings . 
 
Hon member s, the quorum requirements for the Sitting of the House  are 
provided for in the Constitution and the Standing Rules  and unless there  is  an 
indication of unanimous concurrence , voting will be confined to member s 
present in the House  and on the hybrid system who are entitled to cast the ir  
2 
 
votes as per the ATC issued on 11  August 2020 . Hon members, present in the 
Chamber and via Microsoft Teams have all the privileges and immunities 
imparted by law .  
 
Hon member s, when you are considered out of order by the Presiding Officer , 
you will have your microphones muted and call ed  to order . The  Serjeant -at -
Arms will record members’  attendance .  
 
Hon member s, if you wish to raise a point of order , h on members , please if 
you are in the Chamber to do so by addressing the Presiding Officer  as 
expected , but you must please remember to mute your microphones when you 
are done or completed speaking .  
 
Hon member s, t he media have also been granted access to this Microsoft 
Teams meeting as guests of the WCPP;  however members of the press may 
not use the chat room , or speak , or activate the ir  cameras while the Sitting is 
in progress . 
 
Hon member s, f or the Sitting , Language Translation Serv ices are available in 
the Chamber as usual and on Microsoft Teams via the respective channels . 
Hon member s, I wish to remind you that no interjections are permitted during 
these hybrid Sittings and to this end I wish to draw your attention to Rule 40 
of our Standing Rules.  
 
Hon member s, before we move on to Interp el lation s,  please allow me an 
3 
 
opportunity to welcome all the guests in the gallery . Welcome to the Western 
Cape Provincial Parliament , w elcome to the Sitting today . I wish to remind 
the guests in the gallery that you may not participate in the proceedings of 
the House , but you are more than wel come  to observe , and welcome to the 
Western Cape Provincial Parliament . 
 
Hon member s, with that being said , in terms of Rule 197 we will now proceed 
to Interpellations  as printed on the Question Paper . I recognise the hon 
Premier . 
 
INTERPELLATIONS  
 
1.  Mr M K Sayed to ask Mr A R Winde, Premier : 
 
 Given the critical trade and investment relations between the Western 
Cape and China:  
 (a)  Whether Minister  Meyer’s excursion to Taiwan has jeopardised 
these vital ties;  
 (b) whether he will reprimand the Minister  for this conduct; if not, why 
not; if so, what specific disciplinary measures or remedies will be 
taken?   
 
The  PREMIER : Thank you very much , hon Speaker,  and thank you very much 
to the hon Leader of the Official O pposition for the question . Hon  Speaker,  
as previously communicated in this House  in a written reply to the member , 
4 
 
which  was just a few weeks ago , I think also in a similar question during the 
State of the Province Address when we were in Beaufort West , this question 
was asked , but to answer again .  
 
The Minister  Meyer 's trip to Taiwan was not an official engagement 
conducted on behalf of the Western Cape Government  or any of its entities . It 
was conducted strictly in his personal and private capacity and not as a 
member  of this Government .  
 
If the hon member  probably realises that it was the ANC that actually made 
his father a Consul General  in that country , and of course then you find 
personal relationships  and people can do that .  
 
I have  been informed , hon Speaker, that at no time did Minister  Meyer 
suggest that he made the trip as a representative of this Government  nor did 
he attempt to suggest any endorsement of the trip on this Government ’s 
behalf. L ike any resident of the Western Cape  of  South Africa,  Minister  
Meyer has a right to a freedom of speech and expression under our 
Constitution . T he  Western Cape Government  respects Minister  Meyer ’s 
expression in those rights .  
 
Certain members opposite appear  to be intent on damaging the Western Cape 
and South Africa's economic interests for their own petty political gain .  
 
So once again , hon Speaker, I wish to use this opportunity to reiterate the  
5 
 
Western Cape Government ’s  stance  and that is made as clearly as I possibly 
can . W e deeply value our ties and friendships with the People's Republic of 
China , especially our long standing regional partnership with Shandong 
Province . This partnership between the Western Cape and Shandong is South 
Africa's first ever provincial level arrangement with China , and our relations 
with China have benefited the Western Cape , not only in terms of trade and 
investment , but also in terms of sustainable development , innovation and 
entrepreneurship  at l arge .  
 
As the hon member  asking this question  he  is undoubtedly aware our absolute 
focus over the next five years is enabling a job rich economy . In this regard 
we consider the People's Republic of China a vital partner to the Western 
Cape and we stand ready to deepen our economic ties with that nation in the 
spirit of mutual co operation . I n an increasingly complex global economy it is 
essential that we diversify our economic interests , while deepening our long 
standing relationships we have with the region of Shandong and China . Thank 
you  very much , hon Speaker.  
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much , hon Premier . I now recognise the hon 
Sayed. Hon Sayed, before you speak , h on members, please just be reminded 
of the clock for you  as an indication of your time on the screen .  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  Thank you very much … 
[Interjection.]  
 
6 
 
The SPEAKER: Hon Sayed, please give me one second … You may proceed . 
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  Thank you very much , hon 
Speaker, and my thanks to the hon Premier  for the response .  Just let me 
again reiterate that there is only one M EC Meyer . There is not a private  MEC 
Meyer  and a MEC Meyer  here in the House.  Whatever he does reflects on his 
position that he holds , hence he takes an Oath of Office. [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Yes, that is why [Inaudible .]  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:   But I want to ask the 
Premier  whether the Premier  and the Provincial Government , given his 
response , are willing to abandon their denialism , as he has just gone into a 
state of denialism now , and accept that based on the undeniable facts 
available , that the recent visit to Taiwan by MEC Meyer does in fact run the 
risk of jeopardising and straining the Western Cape ’s, and indeed South 
Africa's vital diplomatic trade and investment relations with the People's 
Republic of China ; especially considering that South Africa's official foreign 
policy position regarding the One -China Policy ; whether the Premier  intends 
to reprimand  MEC Meyer  for potential risks that have been induced by his 
damaging conduct ? 
 
If not , why not , and if so what specific disciplinary measures , corrective 
actions or diplomatic measures will be taken , including  with DIRCO, t o 
mitigate any fallout and reaffirm the Province ’s alignment with National 
7 
 
Foreign Policy of China , because i t is  a stated fact that th e Chinese have 
issued a public statement that MEC Meyer is a persona non grata in China . 
[Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Yeah.  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  Unambiguous answers to 
these questions from the Premier , as the Leader of this Government , is vital 
in the context of South Africa as a unitary state , where the foreign policy for 
the Republic and having severed diplomatic relations with Taiwan in 1997 .  
 
The answers are necessary  at this critical time of global geopolitical trade 
and supply chain uncertainty and volatility , which the South African 
economy and the Western Cape economy are  not guaranteed from being 
shielded from . This is why as a country our bilateral relations with our major 
partners , including China , need to be consolidated and enhanced , not diluted , 
while diversifying and expanding horizons with our partners .  
 
Fi nally , how then does Premier  Wind e justify  MEC Meyer 's actions when the 
DA National Leader , Minister  John S teenhuisen , in his capacity as a South 
African Government  Minister  of Agriculture , has actually been appointed as 
the South African Government's Inter -Minister ial Head of the Task Team , 
with developing viable solutions for South Africa to ensure favourable 
market access with our major trading partners , and this extends to the 
strained relations with the United States of America . I thank you . 
8 
 
 
The SPEAKER:   Thank you very much , hon Sayed. I now recognise the hon 
Van Minnen. [Interjection.]  
 
Ms B M VAN MINNEN (DA):  H on Speaker, I am  not sure whether the hon 
Sayed is suffering from selective amnesia or this is simply a case of blatant 
hypocrisy ; just eight days ago the hon member  proudly shared footage on  X 
of himself engaging with Russian representatives , r ecklessly risking our trade 
relations with Europe and the United States . [Interjection.] S uch actions 
threaten vital agreements like AGOA w hich underpin key industries a nd 
thousands of jobs .  
 
Yet today he rises to launch a frivolous and deeply inaccurate interpellation  
levelling baseless accusations against Minister  Meyer , ironically for the very 
conduct he himself is guilty of , but that aside . [Interjection.]  Can the Premier  
please elaborate on the impact of the P rovincial Government ’s relations with 
the Shandong Province?  I thank you . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER : [Inaudible .] Province.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . Can I please ask the Table Staff,  I 
think that there  is somebody on the online platform , i f all microphones can be 
muted on the online platform? Hon members that are  participating on the 
online platform , if you wish to raise a point of order , please do so using the 
hand raise functionality . I recognise the hon Christians . 
9 
 
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  Thank you , hon Speaker. Hon Speaker, we 
have debated this topic over and over again [Interjection.] and I think the 
ANC is causing more damage by misleading the people . [Interjection.]  
 
I want to say what I said before , parliamentarians , member s of this House , 
when they visit countries in their private capacity , m ust do so . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  They must do so. [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] there is a statement.  
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  So now they are misleading the public  
[Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER: Order!  
 
An HON MEMBER: There is a statement. Did you read the statement?  
 
The SPEAKER: Order! Order!  
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  Y ou must ask for an apology [Interjection.] 
Hon Windvogel must still ask her apology [Interjection.]  
10 
 
 
Ms R WINDVOGEL  (ANC):  I will never do that.   
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  She must still ask for an apology. 
[Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER: Order , hon member s! Hon Christians , p lease take your seat . 
[Interjection.]  Order, hon members ! Hon members, there is  a member on the 
floor , so allow the member  to make his input , i f you disagree with the 
member , l ike I always say , interjections are allowed but please do not drown 
out the  hon s peaker, and I am  struggling to hear the  hon speaker o n the floor . 
Hon Christian s,  you may continue . 
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  H on Speaker, you know we must be fair and 
honest with ourselves . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Yeah!  
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  Why do es  the ANC want to make a political 
debate about this ? Minister  Meyer , who was in his private capacity  and it 
must be respected , and t he Premier  just said and we  have  mentioned it to t his 
House , i t was never in his official capacity . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: That is it!  
 
11 
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  How can we no w tell members , “y ou cannot 
go to China , you cannot go to America , because you  are a member of the 
House  or you are of the Executive .”  
 
An HON MEMBER: Yes!  
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  You cannot do that ! S o the ANC must be 
truthful and I do  not know … [Interjection] … the damage that they are 
causing by misleading the p ublic [Interjection.] is more than what we are 
thinking at this moment. So  I believe member s of this House , the Executive , 
if they act in the private capacity , they must do so . I thank you . 
[Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] they  expect too much.  
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much , hon Christian . Order, hon members ! 
[Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: They must get … 
 
The SPEAKER:  Order ! [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: When are they going to …[Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER : [Inaudible .] distraction. [Interjection.]  
12 
 
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] writing on the other side.  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon members, on my left hand side , ha ve you completed 
your dialogue ? [Interjection.] Hon Her ron , you may continue . 
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you , hon Speaker. Hon Speaker,  we 
cannot  lose sight of the fundamental principle that when you are elected an 
official , the lines between your personal and public life are inevitably 
blurred . [Interjection.]  This is not just a matter of perception;  it is  a matter 
of responsibility . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Yes!  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  The  MEC Meyer , as the Western Cape Minister  
for Agriculture , Economic Development and Tourism , holds a position of 
public trust . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Yeah.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  His foremost duty is to protect and advance the 
economic interests of this Province. [Interjection]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Did  you say something?  
 
13 
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  So how can that duty be effectively carried out 
if he  is personally banned from entering China , our largest trading partner in 
Asia . If the MEC visited Taiwan in a private or personal capacity , the 
question is  what exactly happened , or how egregious was his behaviour to 
lead to a ban ? [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Yeah.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  On the other hand if he met Taiwanese officials 
the trip cannot fall under the banner of a personal or private visit . Let us be 
clear , China is not just another market , it is a key player in our Province ’s 
export strategy , potential tourism and foreign investment pipeline. Being 
banned from engaging directly with Chinese officials and business 
representatives , places MEC M eyer  in a compromised position . It limits his 
ability to build relationships , attract investment and promote trade , all of 
which are critical functions of his portfolio .  
 
If  the MEC Meyer 's personal actions or history have led to a ban , that now 
impairs his ability to do his job , t hen it is not merely a private issue  … 
[Interjection]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Order!  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  … it is a public concern and one that demands 
accountability . We cannot allow a member  of  the Executive  to jeopardise 
14 
 
strategic provincial interests . If his capacity to serve is  undermined and there 
is  no clear plan to fix the damage to our economic diplomacy , then he must 
be removed from Office . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Yeah , yes!  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  This is not about personal persecution;  it is  
about safeguarding the provinces' economic future . Thank you . [Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER: Order, hon members ! While we wait for the podium to get to 
hon Sayed  - hon members, interjections are allowed  as I indicated earlier on ; 
but what is happening in the House at the moment is that there are  dialogue s 
ac ross the floor with member s, and in fact it is even interjecting the  speaker 
on the floor . So can I please ask if you want to have a dialogue with your 
colleagues , please do it outside of the Chamber? Hon Sayed, you may 
continue . 
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  Thank you very much . J ust 
to the hon Van Minnen, I think she needs to understand South African foreign 
policy . [Interjection]  [Laughter.]  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  The South African 
Government  has fully fledged relations with a BRICS partner known as the 
Russian Federation . [Interjection.] S o I have  got no apologies , I will  continue 
to attend more of the Russian functions if invited . [Interjection.]  [Applause.]  
15 
 
 
On 2  September 2024 , President Ramaphosa led  a State delegation to China 
that included the National Leader of the Governing Party in this House , the 
hon Minister  John Steenhuisen , in his capacity as the Minister  of Agriculture , 
at  the invitation of His Excellency the Chinese President Xi Jinping .  
 
The two Heads of State not only reaffirmed the strategic importance and the 
ever growing nature of the friendship between ou r two countries over the past 
26 years , they also recommitted to intensify efforts to work towards building 
a high quality China -South Africa community with a shared future .  
 
Now to advance the special bilateral relationship , consolidate mutual trust , 
expand cooperation and enhance coordination , o ur two Heads of State agreed 
to elevate the bilateral relationship to all round strategic cooperative 
partnerships in the new era , underpinned by strong political ties and focused 
on prosperous future with balanced trade and accelerated transformative 
economic growth .  
 
The two Heads of State actually reached a series of important common 
understandings , including amongst others , working towards a high quality 
China -South Africa community with a shared future , structured bilateral 
mechanisms at various levels [Interjection.] to encourage the deepening of 
exchanges between Government  departments and legislative institutions and 
to accommodate subnational interactions at multiple levels .  
 
16 
 
Now the latter is mutually inclusive of the provincial sphere of Government , 
including the Western Cape Province . This South African Government  also 
there reaffirmed the commitment to the One -China Policy , recognising that 
there is but one China in the world represented by the Government  of the 
People's Republic of China as the sole legal government  representing the 
whole of China , and that Taiwan is an inalienable part of China , not an 
independent state.  
 
Now against this backdrop both States thus committed to providing a stable 
and fair enabling business environment  for companies of both sides to ensure 
the safety and legitimate rights and interests of the relevant personnel 
projects and institutions . MEC Meyer  has actually undermined this . O n all of 
these accounts  the  MEC Meyer 's actions , and the denialism that we are seeing 
here by the DA and by the ir  partner the ACDP  … [Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Sayed, your time has expired . Please conclude. 
[Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: It is time to [Inaudible .] 
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: … and this Provincial 
Government [Inaudible .] governance lapses with potential dire economic 
implications nationally and provincially.  [Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much , hon Sayed. Hon Premier.  
17 
 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much , hon Speaker, and thank you very 
much to those who participated in this mini debate . I th ank the hon Sayed,  he  
posed the question and he obviously spoke now at length on an official visit 
between South Africa and China  [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Yeah.  
 
The PREMIER:  … and of course my answer spoke about a private visit 
versus an official visit . [Interjection.]  But in that regard and following some 
of the questions raised by some of the other members that  I have had a 
meeting with the Chinese Ambassador on this specific subject , also with the 
Consul General,  and in actual fact addressed these details with Minister  
Meyer, and we have written to  the A mbassador in this regard . I nteresting ly 
enough two  days ago , on the v ery floor that I have my office s, I engaged with 
the Consul General  following our engagement on this specific issue , because 
we do value our trade and relationship between China and the Western Cape , 
between Shandong and the Western Cape . [Interjection.]  That was just two 
days ago . In actual fact last night I spent the evening with 30  Chinese 
entrepreneurs that are here from China . [Interjection.]  
 
I also want to say that perhaps in regard to the question about our 
relationship with Shandong , Minister  Meyer's D epartment submitted this 
report to our Cabinet , which is the report of the visit of the Department of 
Agriculture to Shan dong P rovince o f 22 to  29 November , and I mean it is 
18 
 
really a detailed report on every single one of the meetings that took place 
between Minister  Meyer ’s Department and the officials and departments in 
Shandong Province , just in November .  
 
I also would like to , in relation to the question around our relationship with 
Shandong  and China itself say that , of course we really as the Western  Cape 
value these relations and we think about the investors that are investing in 
our region , we are  talking about Vivo Electronics, we talk about Hisense , and 
not Hisense in the ir  original 10 years ago , or 11 years ago  now, investment , 
they  have invested three  times in the last 10 years , and in actual fact my own 
visit to China last year was to engage with Hisense on the next investment 
and their future  next 10 years , and celebrate with them what they  have 
achieved since being a small manufacturer , to being the major manufacturer 
in our country , and second biggest on the African continent , on the ir  way to 
become the biggest on our continent , and using this province as their gateway 
to trade in.  
 
Th e Chinese Construction Bank , the China Classification Society or CCS,  
Hisense again as I said , Suntec h Power Holdings , Jin ko Solar , Ren esola  - 
these are all companies that have invested into our province;  and specifically 
out of Shandong,  I have  spoken about the Hisense investment , three of them 
so far , and t here is  also of course S inotruk, which is a really important 
investment into our region , and that shows the commitment of this Province 
to our long -time  relationship with the Shandong Province , h ow we  engage , 
whether it is  the Department of Agriculture , the Economics Department , our 
19 
 
Sport and Culture Department , the sailing exercises we have also in Qingdao , 
our port interaction with the Mayo r of Qingdao , the P ort of Qingdao , and 
looking at the new systems that they are putting in operation to find using AI 
and new technologies in delivering cont ai ners unbelievably  efficiently 
through electronic systems , driverless trucks , i t is unbelievable to see the 
through put  that they  are getting in th at port and looking for the opening of 
opportunities in our port to increase this trade .  
 
Of course , South Africa and China's relationship is really important because 
the relationship between our two regions , we export , 10 ,29% of all of our 
exports go to China [Interjection.]  
 
The PREMIER:  Hon Premier, please conclude.  
 
The PREMIER:  … and 18 ,8% of our imports come from China . They are a 
really important partner .  Thank you, hon Speaker.   
 
[Applause.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon Premier. Hon Sayed.  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  I w ant to know , but it is  
unfortunate , I want to know if the Premier  could take a question ? 
 
The SPEAKER:  T he Premier  does  not have any more time on the floor . Y ou 
20 
 
are more than welcome to pose that question in using other parliamentary 
mechanisms available to you to do so .  
 
Hon member s, that concludes , or that b rings us to the end of Interp el lations .  
 
We will now move on to Questions in terms of Rule 202 . I wish to advise  the 
hon members that once the hon Premier  or the Minister  has started reply to 
the oral question as printed on the Question Paper , hon members must use the 
chat facility for the Sitting of the House  to indicate if they want to ask a 
follow -up  question , f or those member s who  are  online ; and for those 
member s in the Chamber to give an indication to the Table Staff  that you 
want to ask a follow -up question .  
 
Hon member s, there are four opportunities for follow -up  questions , b ut the 
hon member  who has posed the initial oral question , as printed on the 
Question Paper , will have the first opportunity for the follow -up  question , 
and thereafter I will recognise the  hon members for the remaining 
opportunities . That  brings us to the first question on the Question Paper . I 
recognise the hon Premier.  
 
QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY  
 
New questions:  
 
1. Ms T Lithakong to ask Mr A R Winde, Premier:  
21 
 
 
With regard to the Tafelberg Place matter in which the Western Cape 
Government has been a party in various litigation stages involving the piece 
of land:  
(1) Whether the Provincial Government is a respondent in the same 
matter before the Constitutional Court; if so, why;  
(2) whether the Provincial Government has now decided to abide by the 
order of the Western Cape High Court to develop the site for purposes of 
responding to inner -city social housing deficiencies in an effort to 
reverse the effects of racially skewed spatial planning; if so, what are 
the relevant details?  
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much , hon Speaker,  and to the hon  
Lithakong, thank you very much for the question . As we know the question is 
with regard to  Tafelberg, well as you say,  “the  Tafelberg place ”,  and so for 
the purpose of responding to this question , it is presumed that the Tafelberg  
place , as you refer to in the question , you actually refer to , it is  a reference 
to the former Tafelberg school site , 353 on Main Road , Sea Point.  
 
The first part of the question , whether the Provincial Government is a 
respondent in the same matter before the Constitutional Court  and why , and 
so as such the Department of Infrastructure has informed me the following , 
the answer is to (1) “yes”, the Provincial Government is a respondent in the 
same matter before the Constitutional Court  as the owner of the property 
cited .  
22 
 
 
The second part of the question is “no ”, the Order of the Western Cape High 
Court  was set aside by the Supreme Court  of Appeal , and of course , I think as 
this House  knows , this matter has been held up in Court  processes for years ; 
but w as  set aside by the Supreme Court  of Appeal on the matter and is now 
before the Constitutional Court . T he Provincial Government cannot abide by 
an Order that is still under consideration by the Constitutional Court.  
 
However in line with its  service delivery mandate and as provided for by the 
Government  Immovable Asset Management Act 2007 , the G IAMA Act , the 
Western Cape Government  has decided to investigate and plan for 
development of the property for both affordable housing and social  services . 
An announcement by the Provincial Minister  of Infrastructure and Social 
Development took place in January this year .  
 
I want to emphasise that the  Western Cape Government  has always sought to 
make the best possible use of its assets to the benefit of the people of this 
province . A t the time that the debate surrounding the Tafelberg site began , 
the pocket of land was judged to be surplus to Government  need s as a  
decision was taken that the money from the sale of the site could be used for 
better uses and in order to fund vital projects .  
 
Since that time 10 years has lapsed . T he Western Cape's population has 
grown dramatically and we have suffered the effects of the COVID -19 
pandemic . T his confluence of factors drastically changed the demand for 
23 
 
Government  services and housing in the area . Additionally , portions of the 
site are subject to heritage protection requirement s and are unsuitable for 
development into housing . As such this Government 's plan for the Tafelberg 
site has been developed to responsibly cater for the updated needs of the 
surrounding community within the constraints of the said property .  
 
While we await the judgement of the Constitutional Court  in this matter , we 
continue to believe that our plan for the Tafelberg site remains the best 
possible compromise in catering to demand for both affordable housing and 
vital social services in the area . As always we remain committed to using the 
site for the greatest possible benefit of the people of the Western Cape . 
 
Perhaps also when we  are talking about this specific site , one must not talk 
about it without having context of what is  happening in the rest of the region , 
and specifically I think of the property very close to that area  called the 
Helen B ow den Nurses Home , and of course that full hospital site , which we 
know has a plan on the table for far more social housing units than we could 
ever dream to fit into a small property like that 533 piece of land .  
 
We talk about thousands of opportunities in probably the most prime piece of 
land on the African continent , right next to the VA Waterfront , and we also 
know - and I do  not understand why we never get questions about that piece 
of property  or get protests about that piece of property , which has been 
illegally occupied , and we  are now battling to deal with that so that we can 
do the very thing that everybody is asking for  - provide housing according to 
24 
 
that  plan , and of course I can carry on with the Victoria , I mean the 
Woodstock Hospital  site , e xactly the same thing is an issue . B ut of course 
this House  does  not seem to want to engage on those matters , i t just seems to 
be this one and that is stuck in Court.  
 
As I always say to you specifically , Reclaim the C ity and Ndifuna Ukwazi, 
are the registered and affected part ies in the future development of this 
property that Minister  Simmers announced , and the answer is “yes ”,  they are , 
they have registered , they are part of the consultation process , and surely tha t 
is  exactly what we want . T he best thing would be to actually withdraw their 
case so we can get on with delivering housing to the people in places that 
need it . 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . Hon members,  so ordinarily I would 
have provided the questioner the first opportunity , I have  received an apology 
from hon Lit hak ong . S o the follow -up  question s will be dealt with in the 
following order , hon Herron,  hon Van Minnen, hon Bryant and hon Sayed. 
Those were the four hands that I saw . H on Herron.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you , hon Speaker . Hon  Speaker , the 
Western Cape High Court  had made sweeping findings against the Provincial 
Government , including that it had failed to pay attention to its Constitutional 
obligations and it failed to take adequate steps to redress spat ial apartheid .  
What was the Provincial Government 's basis for its appeal ? Thank you . 
 
25 
 
The SPEAKER:   Thank you very much . H on Premier . 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much . I mean we  are very happy to give the 
hon member  all of those aspects in absolute writing . O f course it is public 
documents in court,  but just off -hand , when you have a court  taking away 
powers of a province , you cannot just abide by that , you have to then 
challenge it , that was the original challenge that we took in the first Court 
Ruling , and of course that has been a ping pong from that date onwards . 
 
But the hon member who has just stood up now is looking at a photograph of 
the very hon member at the gates of that site, looking to almost illegally 
occupy it himself, which was very interesting in the role that he has played in 
this process.  But we know that we have got to make sure that in the interest 
of delivering housing …. [Interjections.]  to the citizens of …[Interjection.]   
 
The SPEAKER: Hon Premier , please take your seat.  Hon Sayed?  
 
The  LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker , on a point of 
order.  The  hon Premier  is casting aspersion s on the hon Herron.  To say that 
somebody illegally occupied something, that is a criminal offence against the 
person.  I mean, the person is being accused of doing something criminal.  So, 
he should either go to the police or bring a substantive motion instead against 
the hon member.  [Interjection.]  
 
Hon  MEMBERS:  Ja, ja, about yes!  
26 
 
 
The  LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Thank you.  [Interjections.]  
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much …[Interjection.]  
 
The  LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: He must withdraw!  
 
An  HON MEMBER:  He must withdraw!  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon members, there is no need to be so aggressive.  
…[Laughter.]   
 
The SPEAKER:  There was a point of order.  Hon Premier , I am going to 
allow you an opportunity.  [Interjections.]  Did you refer to … [Interjections.]  
hon Mackenzie, hon Minister  Mackenzie, I will recognise you after I have 
dealt with this point of order.  
 
Hon Premier , did you cast any aspersion on an hon member of this House ? 
 
The  PREMIER : If you check Hansard, you will see I said, ‘on the verge of 
illegally occupying’ and so, if I can continue then, hon Speaker ? 
[Interjections.]  
 
The SPEAKER: I will revert to Hansard and then revert back to the House  if 
there is a need to do so.  Hon Minister  Mackenzie, is that a point of order?  
27 
 
 
The  MINISTER  OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SPORT: Hon Speaker , I was 
covered, but the picture will show you he was on the verge, yes.   
 
An  HON MEMBER:  Oh,  ja!  
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon members.  That  is not a point of order, hon 
Minster Mackenzie.  [Interjection.] Hon Herron, is that a new point of order  
because [Interjection] Hon Herron.   
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you, hon Speaker, and thank you for the 
interventions, but being on the verge, being on the outside, is nothing illegal.  
So, I do not know what illegality the hon Premier  is referring to.  But if I was 
on the verge, as he says and as hon Minister  Mackenzie says, then I was not 
in the premises and what is the point?  [Interjection.]  
 
The  LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: What is the point of order 
from …[Interjection.]   
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  What is the illegality?  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon Herron that  is not a point of order.  [Interjections.]  I 
recognise the hon Walters and then I will recognise the hon Minister , a nd 
then I will recognise the hon Bans , because it seems like we 
…[Interjections.] . Hon Walters . 
28 
 
 
Mr  T C R WALTERS (DA):  Hon  Speaker …[Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER: Order!  
 
Mr  T C R WALTERS (DA):  Hon Speaker , I do believe you have already ruled 
on the matter, … [Interjections.]  and I think the points of order on your 
ruling , it is i n fact frivolous.  [Interjections.]   
 
An  HON MEMBER:  What?   
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon Walters, for the guidance.  
[Interjections.]  Order!  Hon members, I am very capable of chairing the 
Sitting but thank you very much hon Walters for the guidance.  I recognise the 
hon Minister  and then I will recognise the hon Bans.   
 
The  MINISTER  OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SPORT: Hon Speaker , by 
the hon member’s own admission, he wa s on the verge of doing the act  
[Interjections.]  by his own admission.  [Interjections.]   
 
An  HON MEMBER:  The matter has been [Inaudible .] 
 
An HON MEMBER: Yes!  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon Minister , that is not a point of order, and I now 
29 
 
…[Interjections.]   
 
An HON MEMBER: Do you want to … 
 
The SPEAKER: Order, hon members ! [Interjections.]   
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] they may charge you for being on the verge 
of crime.  
 
The SPEAKER:  I now recognise the hon Bans.  What is your point of order, 
hon Bans?  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION : I withdraw ; y ou have made your 
ruling.  [Interjections.]   
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . T hen, the last … [Interjections.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER:  She was just exercising  [Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Order, hon members!  Order!  [Interjections.]  Hon members, 
order.  [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  The Premier does not need your protection, he is 
capable. [Interjection.]  
 
30 
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon members, order! [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  You cannot do that.  
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] opposition. [Interjection]  [Laughter.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Order, hon members ! Hon Sayed, I saw your hand so I am  
going to give you an opportunity  for the point of …[Interjection.]   
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  I was on the verge, I 
withdraw.  
 
The SPEAKER:  No -no, you first had your hand up for a point of order ?  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: No, I withdraw.  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon m embers, are you all satisfied that each one had an 
opportunity to raise their point of order ? [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Hon Sayed was on the verge of a point of order. 
[Laughter.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Okay. Hon Van Minnen, I recognise you . 
 
Ms B M VAN MINNEN (DA):  Thank you , hon Speaker . A s the Western Cape  
31 
 
Government  has already indicated its intentions to include affordable housing 
and the redevelopment of the Tafelberg site , could the Premier  please 
elucidate to us  some of the key developments with regards to social housing 
in the Cape Town CBD and other urban centres . I thank you . 
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much . H on Premier , just to remind  the  hon 
members  that you are allowed to ask one follow -up  question . Premier , I am  
not going to dictate to you how you answer that question , but you are allowed 
one follow -up  question , h on members . H on Premier , over to you . 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you , hon  Speaker . I am  just a little bit confused , w e 
were actually dealing with something else when all of that happened and the 
point of order came in , so I will  just complete the “v erge part .”  
 
The SPEAKER:  My apologies , hon  Premier , were you still responding to hon 
Herron ? 
 
The PREMIER:  Yes.  
 
An HON MEMBER: He was on the verge of completing [Interjection.]   
 
The SPEAKER: Order, hon members ! O rder ! My apologies , hon  Premier . I am  
going to allow you an opportunity to respond , to complete your response to 
the hon Herron, and then you can do the hon Van Minnen in the same  - my 
apologies , hon Herron.  Hon Premier.  
32 
 
 
The PREMIER:  T hank you very much , hon Speaker, and obviously when the 
hon Sa yed raised a point of order , he also knows about it very well because 
perhaps was  not alongside this attempted occupation of the property  
[Interjection.]  but he was in the meeting just before that  [Interjection.]  and 
then I also want to get some clarity , I want some clarity , hon Speaker 
[Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Premier , please take your seat . 
 
An HON MEMBER :  [Inaudible .] to sit down.  
 
The SPEAKER: Order, hon members ! [Interjection .] †Ek het nou self die  can 
of worms  oopgemaak  [I have now myself opened the can of worms, ] so my 
apologies . Hon Sayed, you m ay – is that a point of order?  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Hon Chair,  just a point of 
order , the Premier  is misleading , i n fact I was not only in the public meeting , 
I was alongside the hon member Herron and you know, proudly so, in defence 
of the homeless of this country , I was alongside the hon member Herron and I 
will be alongside him again when he goes there . Thank you.  [Applause.] 
[Laughter.]  
 
An HON MEMBER : [Inaudible .] alongside the member  [Inaudible .]  
 
33 
 
The SPEAKER:  Order, hon members ! Order!  
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] nerve when they said that Helen is the real 
opposition.  [Applause.] [Laughter.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Shame!  
 
The SPEAKER:  Order! Hon Minister , I will recognise you now. 
[Interjection.] Hon members, o rder!  Can you please mute everyone on the 
virtual platform . I f there is  a member on the virtual platform that wants to 
raise a point of order please indicate so with using the hand raise 
functionality . H on Minister, i s that a point of order ? 
 
An HON MINISTER: Yes , hon Speaker, there is now an admission from hon 
Sayed that he was also on the verge, so we have two member s of this House  
that w ere  on the verge th at day . 
 
† ‘n AGB LID:  A g, nee man, jy is …[Onduidelik .] [Gelag]  
An HON MEMBER:, no man, you are…[Inaudible.] [ Laughter.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Minister that  is not a point of order . Hon Premier , my 
apologies , you may continue . 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much , hon Speaker.  T hank you , I apologise 
to the hon member , I could have then said both of them were on the verge of 
34 
 
illegally occupying a piece of property , and it is  not  just for clarity , i t is  not 
the verge or the pavement . T he photograph shows at the gate with the 
security guard s stopping them from going into the property , and in actual fact 
if you listen to the recordings from the security company , you will hear them 
saying , “ please , we need reinforcements because these people are trying to 
illegally occupy this piece of property .” [Interjection.]  So the word is not the 
verge  as  in the pavement , t hey were on the verge of illegally occupying a 
piece of property .  Luckily security stopped it and did  not enable that to 
happen . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  …W here is the person?  
 
The PREMIER:   So , if I can then move on , hon Speaker, to the next part  or 
the hon Van Minnen’s question , and she actually asks about other properties . 
In my first response I spoke to  - a really big frustration is that we have  not 
managed to deal with enabling Helen Bowden  to become an affordable 
housing space , or the precinct of the Victoria Hospital , which is a major 
precinct and with a major plan for development .  
 
But I also think about Minister  - and now of course I am  now venturing into 
Minister  Simmers’  space , but at least he and I were together when we 
announced Leeuloop , which will actually be  - the construction will start this 
year still , right in the centre of the City . That is  another Central City 
development for affordable housing . I have  mentioned already the Woodstock 
site, and perhaps this is where we also need to , and maybe this is where I call 
35 
 
on the Leader of the Opposition and member s in this House  to join us to say , 
“how do we get at the same time other pieces of land , like Young sfield and 
Wingfield that we  have asked f or  so long .” 
 
But even more importantly than that , I think a piece of property that where 
we have really failed the citizens of this province , in enabling , first of all 
symbolically a return , and really enabling  - because I am  talking about space 
now , and that is District 6 , that more than 30 years after democracy we have 
not managed to utilise such a key and meaningful piece of property called 
District 6 . 
 
Really I must say to the hon Sayed, join me , l et us  go and try and get this 
thing finalised . It cannot be delayed this long , where people  - and if ever 
there was a space for redress , and real redress , and real symbolic redress , i t 
would be a site in  the City like District 6 , but you never hear anything about 
it , it  really is distressing , and we need to engage on it , as a Province , as a 
Parliament , and as a Government , to say , “ let us  work together on making 
sure that we develop that site .’   
 
Then of course there are other sites , I think the work that we started at the 
Conradi e site has really shown a different form of housing development , 
where it is wor k, live, play , and I mean , Minister , when you and I were there 
to open a sporting facility , and of course the next phase w here thousands 
more opportunities , the commercial investment that is  taking place there .. . 
Just having a look at people coming home from work and then picnicking on 
36 
 
the side of the lawns or using the sporting facilities or going for a run around 
the perimeter that is  being established , i t really shows that these are the kind 
of new developments we want to see . 
 
Then perhaps also following on from the hon Van Minnen’s question , that is a 
document written by Professor Ivan Turok , and I would suggest that 
everybody go and ha ve a read of this document , “A natomy of an alliance of 
affordable urban housing ”,  and of course you know  that h e produces this 
document also for the Human Rights Commission . Ivan Turok, the South 
African N RF  Chair in City -Region Economies , and it really is an interesting 
document to read , and it really comes up for some of the projects that are 
being delivered in the inner -city  of Cape Town , and it juxtaposes these 
affordable housing units to other cities and really shows that actually more is 
being done here . W e have got  [Interjection.] … 
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Premier , please take your seat .  Hon Minister  Lon dt , is 
that a point of order ? 
 
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:  Yes , hon Speaker, the 
Premier wants us to read mo re  stuff , but I do  not even know if the hon 
Kamfer has r ead the book I gave him , s o you cannot  give him more 
homework , Premier, I do  not think  he has read the book I have already given 
him.  [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Joh!  
37 
 
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Minister , that is not a point of order . [Interjection.]  
Order, hon members ! That is not a point of order . Hon Premier , my apologies , 
you may continue. [Interjection.]  
 
The PREMIER:  So of course we need to be honest with regards to this 
specific issue of delivering opportunities to citizens that really need it , 
especially undoing the apartheid sp atial planning legislation and what effects 
it had on our citizens , and I think that is  exactly where the announcements 
that have been made by Minister  Simmers really go a long way to show that 
we are working very , very hard , and he re is an independent review of that 
analysis of what we are doing . There is  still a way to go .  
 
I spoke about Le eul oop . T he Minister  is soon to talk about the Founder ’s 
Garden and the opportunities there . We see in the City of Cape Town , I think 
some of their planning regimes , and he also talks about it here , on some of 
the areas where you actually have lesser regimes or enabling environments , 
where even someone who has received a pro perty, a h ouse  on a piece of land , 
and proactive funding towards enabling densification on planning for some of 
those site s. 
 
There is also really innovative and new ways of thinking of how we develop 
properties where people can not only have a place to live , but create value 
out of their properties . They  have got their title deed , they can then instead 
of having one  †hophuis  [RDP house ] they  can turn it into six  apartments or 
38 
 
eight  apartments . They can then get funding from financial institutions who 
are partners with it , the City will then discount planning approval processes , 
so that at the end of the day people can not only have a place to live , but can 
use that title deed to grow value and wealth for themselves and of course for 
future generations .  
 
These are the really important things that we  have got to get right around this 
specific issue, and it is actually very sad that for years and years and years 
we get stuck in Court processes around a small piece of property , that in 
actual fact we have now , years ago said , “ let us  register interested and 
affected parties , l et us  change the idea around this property , and actually let 
us  enable the specific development ”, so that those people who are opposing 
it , are actually oppos ing  it , I do  not know why , but they are getting in the 
way of actually delivering on the thing that they  are very asking for 
themselves .  
 
We need to make sure that we speed this up , s o I cannot wait for the 
Constitutional Court  ruling so that we can actually move on and get it done . 
Thank you , hon Speaker.  
 
The SPEAKER: Thank you very much . I now recognise the hon Bryant . 
 
Mr D W BRYANT (DA):  Thank you very much , hon Speaker.  It is  certainly 
heartening to hear  … [Interjection.]  
 
39 
 
An HON MEMBER:  Hon Speaker, I have got a question.  
 
Mr D W BRYANT (DA):  … all of the new projects that are being rolled out 
by Minister  Simmers’  Department , and yourself , Premier , b ut I wonder if you 
could perhaps expand a little bit on the points that you raised in your 
responses around the illegal and unlawful occupations , and what sort of an 
impact this is having on the rollout , not only o n the projects , but also on 
those people currently on the housing waiting list who might not be afforded 
an opportunity at some of those development sites . Thank you .  
[Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Is that not … 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . I just want to remind  the h on 
members  that you have one;  you can ask one follow -up  question , so y ou 
cannot  have two or three subsections in your question to the Premier .   
 
An HON MEMBER: Yeah, sure.  
 
The SPEAKER: You can only have one question , and also  hon members, I am  
not going to dictate to the person responding on how they should or should 
not respond , b ut please be mindful that you cannot pose a new question . I f 
you pose a new question , then a new question must be placed on the Question 
Paper . S o you can ask a follow -up  question on an answer that you  have 
already received . Hon Walters , is that a point of order on my comments ? 
40 
 
 
Mr T C R WALTERS (DA):   I am  respectful and I hope it is  not a 
confrontational and I am  too respectful of you , b ut the issue of illegal 
occupation and people on the verge of illegal occupation was raised . So I do 
believe it is  part of the response of the substance of the discussion .  
 
The SPEAKER:  No, absolutely [Interjection]  
 
Mr T C R WALTERS (DA):   So I just would like you to keep that in 
consideration that it perhaps is not a new question . [Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Absolutely. Hon members, hon member s, it is for the 
[Interjection] Order hon members , I am on the floor , there is no need for  - it 
is my duty to ensure that I facilitate a f air process and allow member s to have 
the privileges in terms of the parliamentary privileges . T he reality is I am  
reminding members that you can have one follow -up  question and that you 
cannot pose a new question . With that being said , I cannot dictate how a 
question is responded to . Hon Sayed, i s th at a new point of order ? 
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  Hon Chair, t he hon 
member  has now reopened an issue after you have ruled on the matter , and it 
takes me again , be cause this notion is now being sp read that there was an 
attempt to occupy . There was no attempt to illegally occupy any land . 
[Interjection.] We were taking up the issues facing people;  we were taking up 
the  issue of social housing . I think it is this notion , after you have ruled 
41 
 
already , I think that is  for me the principle , you  have ruled on the matter , 
close the matter . Thank you . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  [Inaudible .] instructions.  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon members [Interjection.]   
 
An HON MEMBER:  Look who is talking.   
 
The SPEAKER: Order, hon members !  
 
An HON MEMBER: Look who is talking over [Inaudible .] motion that we 
call a [Inaudible .] substantive [In terjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Substantive motion.  
 
The SPEAKER: Hon Walters  is that a new point of order , b ecause colleagues , 
I am  also mindful of points of orders on points of orders which are  against 
the Rules . 
 
Mr T C R WALTERS (DA):  Hon  Chair,  perhaps just to clarify , I was talking 
about whether it is  a new question or not  [Interjection.] I was  not raising the 
issue again of politicians on the verge of illegally occupying a site . I did  not 
reopen that particular issue . [Interjection.]  
 
42 
 
The SPEAKER: Hon members, I do  not know what it is today . [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  This is not your House .  
 
The SPEAKER:  T oday we  are going into one year into office  [Interjection.]  
Order!  This month it is  a year , nearly a year [Interjection.] Order, hon 
members! [Interjection.] Hon Bans, is that a point of order ? Did  you have a 
point o f order ? 
 
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  H on Speaker, this is 
continuously happening . T hat member stands up and h e speaks whatever he 
wants to speak and he continues as if this is a kindergarten . W e cannot  have 
that be happening . We will also just stand up and start speaking , and then I 
will  be called to order because it is  not friendly for the Chief Whip to listen 
to . This is not fair . You  have made your ruling , w e must all abide . There 
cannot  be some getting privileges more than the others . It is  not fair . 
[Interjection]  
 
The SPEAKER:  O rder ! [Interjection.] Honourable, order ! [Interjection.] 
Order ! [Interjection.] Order, hon members ! I have  allowed the Leader of the 
Opposition had a point of order , I have  allowed that and hon Walters 
responded to that , so that was becoming a dialogue . I have ruled in that case 
and it is not a point of order . Hon members, I want to remind you again , if 
you want to have a dialogue with your colleagues across the floor , p lease do 
so outside of the Chamber. Hon Chief Whip, is that a  new point of order ? 
43 
 
 
The CHIEF WHIP  OF THE RULING PARTY :  Yes , hon Speaker, and I am  
rising on Rule  59 . H on Speaker, the Chief Whip of the Official O pposition is 
being ageist and she is reflecting on  integrity and the dignity of an old senio r 
citizen in the House , by referring in  her response to hon Walters as an old 
grey man who belongs in a kindergarten  [Interjection.]  and also , hon Speaker, 
I am  feeling quite verbally abused and attacked by both the Chief Whip and 
the Deputy, who  are  sending threatening messages my way . Please protect me , 
hon Speaker.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Order ! [Interjection.] Hon members, order ! [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  [Inaudible .] 
 
The SPEAKER:  Order! [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   [Inaudible .] substantive motions … [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  I look older [Inaudible .]   
 
The SPEAKER: Order hon member s. There are citizens watching this session . 
Hon Chief Whip , that  is not a point of order . I cannot pr otect you with 
regards to your WhatsApp messages flowing . I will ensure that you have the 
necessary protection when you  are on the floor .  
 
44 
 
Hon members, can I please ask that you follow the parliamentary mechanisms  
if you have any issues that you want to bring to the attention of the House , 
but we must also allow the  - we have an Order Paper , colleagues and we must 
allow the Order Paper  and the business of the House  to continue . Hon 
Premier , my apologies . You may continue . 
 
The PREMIER:  Hon  Speaker, I also must sincerely apologise to the House  
and to the hon Bryant , that after all of this I have  actually forgotten exactly 
what he asked . Can I ask  that he ask it again please. [Laughter.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Ask three questions then we will [Inaudible .]  
 
An HON MEMBER: Three in one.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Honourable, I am  going to allow the hon Br yant to pose his 
question . Hon Bryant , you do not need to make any introductory remarks , y ou 
are allowed one follow -up  question . 
 
An HON MEMBER:  He is not taking questions now.  
 
Mr D W BRYANT (DA):  Thank you , hon Speaker.  It was , “ what is the 
impact of illegal and unlawful invasions on the existing projects and the 
housing waiting list ?”  Thank you . [Interjection.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Premier.  
45 
 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you and thank you very much for that question , and I 
think it is  a really a relevant question because  we  are really trying to use 
high value inner -city  properties to deliver affordable housing to people who 
really need it and deserve it , and then you have illegal occupations that are 
not easily dealt with , that result in long processes in court s to get to finality , 
[Interjection.] and what happens is that p eople then use that opportunity to 
jump the queue , and that is also n ot in the best interests of achieving that 
redress that we so desperately need . [Interjection.]   
 
So as I mentioned earlier , the Helen Bowden  Nurses H ome , it is an issue and 
we have to actually get to a stage where this is perhaps a call to say to those 
parties that  really want to see redress happening , “l et us  find a way of 
actually enabling those buildings to be repurposed , l et us  use Helen Bowden, 
and let us  also use Woodstock Hospital .  
 
The other impact of course is the uncertainty of other property owners in that 
vicinity , and how do we enable redevelopment of communities and 
enablement of communities and certainty for communities , and then of course 
people on the waiting list that just get pushed back because of these delays , 
that in itself is absolutely unfair . 
 
Of course while the interjections were taking place , hon Speaker, I also had a 
look at one of the documents I had in my pack which spoke about t he 
constitutional judgement on the Tafelberg  case and th e future of social 
46 
 
housing in  our region , and you know a gain I want to reiterate that the illegal 
land invasions , the lo ng  court  processes , how that really holds b ack 
investment and  development , and you know this whole battle has been about 
0,73 hectares of that piece of property , 0,73 hectares of that property that can 
be used for mixed -use affordable housing .  
 
Then of course the heritage space , which of course you cannot  use that for , 
because that is the actual school building space , and that is 0 ,86 hectares, and 
we have this huge lo ng protected year after year after year battle around the 
small piece of property , when in actual fact that we should all be standing 
together , and which I do  not have any questions on and we should be having 
them , w hich is the question that the hon Bryant asks , is what about the other 
invaded properties ? 
 
At the same time let us  balance those with what Minister  Simmer s is 
announcing , and I mean we are announcing numbers  that are huge numbers of 
opportunities for citizens to have access to affordable housing in the inner -
city ; at the same time that we  are looking at other programmes for 
decentralisation of the economy , f inding economic opportunity across the 
region of the province , and in those spaces that has got potential for jobs and 
growth , because this all links together with finding a space that we can give 
people opportunities .  
 
Nothing changes your life like a title deed which Mr Simmer s is now  
implementing ; it is almost common practise , you get your key and your title 
47 
 
deed at the same time . That is  opportunity and that is  how we grow our 
economy , and that is  how we reduce our unemployment rate , and that is  how 
we enable a  future that we are all looking for . I trust everyone in this House  
is looking for . Thank you very much , hon Speaker.  [Applause.]  
 
The SPEAKER:   Thank you very much . I recognise the hon Sayed. Hon 
Herron, is that a Point of order ? 
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Hon Speaker, yes , h ave we finished this 
question ? 
 
The SPEAKER:  So we still , I need to recognise the hon Sayed now.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  I will do it afterwards, thanks.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon Sayed.  
 
The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION:  Thank you very much, hon 
Speaker, and let me thank the Premier for the responses even though I know 
there was a deflection from the real issues of the housing backlog in the 
province , and we even know waiting lists are not even adhere d to . But let me 
just  - I want to thank the Premier  for outlining the public participation 
process when it comes to the sale of Government  owned land , and the fact 
that stakeholders ought to be engaged , it is  very important and we thank the 
Premier  for that .  
48 
 
 
So I just wanted to know from the Premier  whether this particular process 
was followed , the process that he speaks about with regards to the land in 
question here , was this process also followed not too far away within Walmer 
Estate during the sale of the Princess Hall ? Was this process also followed ? 
Thank you . 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much , hon Sayed. Hon Premier . 
[Interjection.]  
 
The PREMIER:  So , first of all thank you very much to the hon Sayed for that 
question . I mean first  of all on this specific case , because of course this is 
the question on the Order Paper , I know that it is  probably two years ago that 
the process of registration for interested and affected parties was registered 
and when people started to apply for  it.   
 
On the Walmer case that he  ha s just asked for , I am  honestly go ing to  be able 
to say I cannot answer him on that , and I  would ask him if he  would  actually 
put that in as a question , because  it is a legitimate question . W e have got  to  
be able to get the detail on it . So unfortunately I cannot  give him an answer . 
It is a different question , i f I was able to answer it I would  not say it is a new 
question , I would answer to him , but unfortunately I am  not able to .  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . Hon members, that brings us t o the 
end of Question 1. H on Herron, is  that a point of order ? 
49 
 
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  H on Speaker, it is a request in terms of Section 
or Rule 65 (2) , I am  asking your permission whether I may make a personal 
statement  or  a personal explanation ? 
 
The SPEAKER:  You did  not give me prior approval , or prior notice in terms 
of the R ule , but I am  going to allow that . Hon members, the member  can  - in 
terms of the Rule , the member  can make a  statement that directly affects the 
member , and there is  no debate the re after . I will allow you th ose  3 minutes . 
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you , hon Chair , and thank you for 
allowing me to do so . Obviously I could  not give notice because I did  not 
know that I was going to be accused of illegally invading or occupying a 
provincial property  … [Interjection.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  On the verge of.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  … or being on the verge of doing so , b ut I think 
it is  important to set the record straight because this was also raised in the 
Premier 's reply at SOPA when he accused me of illegally occupying or 
attempting to occupy the Tafelberg s ite .  
 
I think it is  important for the House  to know that on 8 February 2025 a 
meeting was held in the Sea Point Methodist Church hosted by organisations 
who are involved in activating  for affordable housing in the inner -city . T he 
50 
 
Provincial Government , the Premier , and the MEC for Infrastructure were 
apparently invited to attend and participate in that meeting , but declined to 
do so .  
 
The member Sayed and I did attend and we did address the member s of the 
audience in the Sea Point Methodist Church  Ha ll . T he member s then 
proceeded peacefully to walk and march to the Tafelberg site accompanied by 
law enforcement that  was  monitoring what we were doing . A t the Tafelberg 
site , if anyone has been there , the site is secured by security guards and the 
site is closed , t here is a gate .  
 
The gate was opened by the security guards allowing members of the crowd 
to sit in the fore court  before you get to the second set of gates which is about 
the size of a car , and the members of the crowd which did not include me , I 
did not enter the site , and neither did member Sayed,  then listened to two or 
three speeches ventilating frustration over the failure to use that site for 
public and affordable housing . T he member s then returned to the Sea Point 
Methodist Church Hall where the meeting continued .  
 
The  Premier , the MEC's , the Provincial Government , l ooking at a photograph 
and interpreting that as an intention to illegally occupy a site , is wrong . 
There was no intention to illegally occupy any site by myself , by member 
Sayed, nor by the members of Reclaim the City and Ndifuna Ukwazi, and all 
the other organisations and members who were attending this meeting to 
discuss affordable housing . Thank you , hon Speaker.   [Applause.]  
51 
 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . [Interjection] . Hon members, order ! 
[Interjection] Order ! Hon members, that was in terms of Rule 65 (2). I just 
want to  [Interjection.] O rder ! T he Rule makes provision where a member  can 
vindicate or make a statement to vindicate him or herself , s o it is  only related 
to the conduct of hon Herron.  
 
We will now continue with Question 2 on the Question Paper and I recognise 
the hon Premier . 
 
2. Ms A Cassiem to ask Mr A R Winde, Premier:  
 
With regard to the George building collapse investigations by the Western 
Cape Government:  
(a) What are the purposes of these investigations by his Provincial 
Government if the South African Police Services (SAPS) and the National 
Department of Employment and Labour are already conducting similar 
investigations and  
(b) what caused the investigations by the Province to take long, similar to 
those of the SAPS and the Department of Labour?  
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much , h on Speaker , and thank you very much  
to the  hon Cassie m for the question .  
 
(a) I t is important to remember that the building that collapsed at 75 Victoria 
52 
 
Street  in George on 6  May at 14:09  represent ed  one of the worst single 
human tragedies in the Western Cape in recent memory . 34 lives were lost 
and many more suffered life change injuries . When I arrived at the site a few 
hours after the collapse our incredible dedicated rescue teams had launched a 
full scale response involving a vast array of different stakeholders .  
 
To this day I am  still in awe of the extreme dedication and professionalism of 
our teams and what they showed as they worked around the clock to save 
lives . In the face of such a harrowing tragedy I am  also immensely proud of 
our teams for saving the lives of 28 survivors , some of whom I met in 
December last year .  
 
In the immediate and aftermath of the collapse it was quite clear that we 
needed a record of critical evidence from the rubble . You know obviously as 
they were removing rubble we needed to record  it be cause it was being put 
into trucks and being removed . H owever our im mediate priority at that stage 
had to be search and rescue , and by the time this process concluded we knew 
it might be too late to collect some of the evidence we needed .  
 
Because of this and b ecause of no N ational Government  department or entity 
seen  to share our sense of urgency at the time , the Western Cape Department 
of Infrastructure appointed consulting engineers to document the evidence as 
quickly as possible , and to conduct an independent investigation into the 
cause of the collapse , with a focus on design adequacy , construction practise 
and related contributing factors , the strength of material , the reinforcing 
53 
 
materials used , etcetera , etcetera .  
 
This process could not wait until the site was cleared and so material , soil 
and core samples were collected from the site by  analysts under strict 
supervision and control of the South African Police Service . But more than 
the practical reasons for doing  our own investigation , we also felt a sense of 
obligation to those who had been injured in the collapse and to the families 
of those whose lives have been lost .  
 
For the  Western Cape Government  it is not about check ing a box or being 
seen to be doing the right thing by the public , i t is  about giving those who 
have been directly affected by this disaster closure , and it is  about making 
sure we treat this matter with the seriousness and the respect it deserves . We 
need to have consequences and that has to be determined through 
investigative processes and then a court  of law.  
 
(b)  Given the nature of the collapse and the rigorous format of the assessment 
done , the investigation was completed in a relatively short time . If you 
remember publicly the engineer said this could take years , and I said we 
cannot and we have not got years , w e need you to speed up that process . This 
process included the f ollowing , extensive sample analysis , structural 
modelling , material testing , document analysis , security of video and 
photographic records of site conditions prior to the collapse , collecting and 
studying information provided by third parties , including eye witnesses .  
 
54 
 
Importantly we also insisted that the report be comprehensively peer 
reviewed . We knew that this report was going to assist SAPS in pursuing 
accountability against those responsible for the collapse;  we had to ensure 
that its accuracy and impartiality could not in any way be considered a doubt .  
This peer review by an independent party added some weeks to the process , 
but comprehensively ensured the report ’s validity before it was handed over 
to SAPS in January of this year . T he investigation by the  Western Cape 
Government  is one of several that were launched , with SAPS being the lead 
body responsible for investigating an incident of this nature .  
 
The report is now the domain of the South African Police Services , which 
must be considered both the finding of our report and all other evidence in 
their pos session as part of the overall criminal investigation to determine if 
charges are to be brought . T he findings in the report are of such a nature that 
the  Provincial Government believes they will significantly assist the SAPS 
investigation . W e now await the results of the SAP S investigation and will 
continue to assist their investigators in any way that we can .  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . Hon members, I will allow hon  
Cassiem the first opportunity , t hen I got hon Masipa, h on Wessels , and hon 
Van Minnen, i n that order , and those are  the four opportunities , t here was no 
indication , h on members, from anyone on my left hand side . [Interjection] 
When we started Oral Questions I gave an indication that as soon as the hon 
Premier  or Hon Minister  start speaking , you must give me an indication that 
you want to ask  a follow -up  question .  [Interjection]  
55 
 
 
An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible .] if the response  … 
 
The SPEAKER:  Hon member , I am  not going to get into a dialogue with you 
with regards to the Rules , t hat is  how the Rules will work , s o those are  the 
four opportunities . H on Cassiem.  
 
Ms A CASSIEM (EFF):  Thank you hon Speaker. Hon Premier , can the 
Premier please explain where the Western Cape Provincial Government got 
the mandate to conduct parallel investigations with regards to the George 
building collapse and more importantly , hon Speaker, why is the specific 
investigation report not being made public since it was the public’s  money 
which wa s being used to produce it ? Thank you , hon Speaker.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . H on Premier , before you continue , 
hon members, I wish to remind you once again , you are allowed one follow -
up  question in terms of the Rule . Hon Premier , I am  not go ing to dictate to 
you how you answer that question . 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much , hon Speaker, and thank you very 
much to the hon member . S o standing there on site , seeing the rescue taking 
place and the emotions that were running wild at that stage , then leaving the 
site and going into the Town H all and engaging with the family members , 
whose families were now buried under all of this rubble , I came back out and 
I stood there and  I had this feeling that I was standing on an earthquake site , 
56 
 
because you normally see those visuals , and I thought how are we going to 
find who  is responsible for this while this is being removed ? 
 
I remember going back and then Minister  Simmers and I were engaging and I 
said we have to , who  is investigating this , and actually at that time the 
Department of Labour arrived , and th at  was quite interesting because in 
actual fact the question is do we have a mandate ? We do  not actually have a 
mandate , w e are not asked to supply this investigation or do this 
investigation .  
 
But the Department of Labour actually arrived on site and ordered everyone 
off the site , the rescue rs,  the whole lot , and said , “ we are taking control of 
the site , y ou must all leave .” I t was quite interesting , they were  not in terested 
in the  investigation which is their mandate and what they should be doing . 
What  they did was  said , “ everybody get off , we  are taking control of the 
site .”  
 
The interesting - what followed is General Pat ekile then stepped up and said , 
“that is incorrect , y ou cannot take control of the site , I am  in charge here at 
the site, and the Disaster Management team who is saving lives is in charge 
of this site , and if you proceed with what you  are trying to do , I will arrest 
you and put you in jail, and remove them from the site .”  They should have 
then said,  “how do we engage with our investigators to investigate this 
building site ?” [Interjection]  
 
57 
 
But we then very quickly went through our procurement process and got 
investigators on site because we knew you had to test exactly as I have  
answered in this question , [Interjection .] you have to test as you are 
removing , because that is  the only way you  are going to really get down to 
what was the cause . 
 
Then the second part is about making it public . I have  said this many , many 
times , and absolutely , public money is used in this Government  to produce 
this result , this investigation , and the document was handed over to the 
Police . It is not in the interests of any criminal justice process to have a trial 
by media or a trial by Parliament of the investigations beforehand .  
 
In every single investigation that takes place , the Police use public money , 
exactly the same way , the Department at National level does  not say , “ well 
bring us all of your investigations before it gets to court.” T hat would be 
totally counterproductive , and I can assure you the Police would stop it 
through a court  process , because you cannot do that , y ou cannot trial within a 
trial , before a trial , using the evidence . I have already said on a number of 
occasions , as soon as the papers are lodged and the charges are laid , that 
document will be made public , i t will also be made available to this 
Parliament . [Interjection]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . H on Masipa.  
 
Mr N P MASIPA (DA):  Thank you , hon Speaker. H on Speaker, in light of 
58 
 
Minister  Simelane releasing her report publicly , did she discuss the report 
with the Premier  or Minister  Simmers prior to its release , or has she shared 
the report or convened any meeting to engage on its contents since its 
release ? I thank you , hon Speaker.  [Interjection]  
 
The SPEAKER:  H on P remier.  
 
The PREMIER:  The answer is definitely “no ”,  [Interjection] but maybe if I 
could make a comment on it  - it was seen as the report and then the next 
thing there was a whole lot of backpedalling and announced a  dra ft report , 
[Interjection] because exactly the same thing applies , is if there is  
information in that report that is going to be compromised before a court  of 
law has a chance to interrogate it , [Interjection] or before the investigators 
lay their charge , that does  not make any sense to me whatsoever . 
[Interjection]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . Hon members, the next question is 
com ing from hon Wessels on the online platform . H on Wessels , I recognise 
you . 
 
Mr D J WESSELS (DA):  Thank you very much , hon Speaker. Hon  Premier , 
yes , a f ollow  up  to member Masipa’s question , t he National Minister  made 
her report public via the media , so my question would also have been were 
you finished w ith her  report , but in the absence of that , what is the 
communication structures that should be in place between the different 
59 
 
spheres of Government  in such a case , as I believe it is extremely important 
to serve justice to the victims of this tra ged y. Thanks . 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much . Hon Premier , t here are  again two 
questions , or more than one question;  I am  not going to dictate how you 
answer it . Hon members, this is the last reminder  then I am  not going to 
allow  - if you do not follow the Rules , I am  going to dismiss the question in 
future . Can I please ask that you stick to the Rule s, h on members;  you are 
allowed one follow -up  question . Hon Premier , I am  not going to dictate how 
you answer that question . You may continue . [Interjection]  
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much , hon Speaker, and to the hon member  
for the question . I mean I am  being asked something here in the absence of 
legal process or advice , but quite frankly I would understand that  because 
SAPS is  in charge of this process going forward , and legally the first 
question they would ask is who has responsibility here , the Department of 
Labour , the NHBRC , the Municipality , the South African Council of 
Engineers ; and those are all parties that have been cross -questioned and I 
believe have put in their reports in different ways .  
 
The last time I had an update from General Pa tekile was that they were 65% 
through their investigation , and he raised with me there were two documents 
they were still awaiting , one was a document from the Municipality . I then 
elected to write to the Municipality and asked them to speed it up because the 
investigation needs it . I got a letter back from the Mayo r to say , “ yes ”,  they 
60 
 
are aware and within the next 24 hours that document will be with the 
invest igators .  
 
I also wrote to the other entity which was the Department of Labour , I have 
not had an answer back yet and I am  not sure whether they have reported , but 
those will be the formats , and then of course the investigator can then 
investigate and cross -question and ask anybody , that investigation g ives the 
investigators openness to question people on site , people who were observers , 
whatever it was , in order to get to a position that the investigation enables 
them to make a decision on prosecution , I mean on laying off charge s.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much , h on Premier . Hon Van Minnen.  
 
Ms B M VAN MINNEN (DA):  Thank you , hon Speaker. Could the Premier  
please provide an update on the status and expected release date of the report 
from the South African Police Service ? I  thank you . 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Hon Premier . 
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you to the hon member for the question. That is also 
quite difficult. I have not had a further update since my last one where they 
said 65%. I would imagine they are working as fast as possible to get it done 
quickly and I am pretty certain that once that happens and there are charges 
laid that judiciary will do the same thing.  
 
61 
 
I must use this opportunity to say that I actually had a meeting with the Judge 
President this morning and it was not on this case, but there is a willingness 
to try and process specifically these kind of cases with speed and I must 
congratulate them for the case that they have just held on the Joshlin Smith 
case and how very quickly they got it into the courts, and also how this time 
they actually took the courts to the people. So it happened in Saldanha, so 
people can actually see real -time justice being done, and I am pretty certain 
that this probably will be one of those cases as well, but unfortunately the 
last I had was 65% of the way. I know that that has probably moved a lot 
closer to 80 or 90% of the way because of the answer that I have received 
already.  
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon Premier.  
 
That brings us to the end of Question 2 and we move on to Question  3 and I 
recognise the hon Premier.  
 
3.  Ms B M van Minnen to ask Mr A R Winde, Premier:  
 
What is the overview of usage patterns at (a) the 10 most used eCentres 
in Cape Town and (b) what are the detail of the most (i) used eCentres 
and (ii) accessed services?  
 
The PREMIER:  I need another bottle of water, hon Speaker. Hon Speaker, 
thank you very much. Ah, excellent.  
62 
 
 
Hon Speaker, thank you very much and to the hon member Van Minnen for 
the question.  
 
First of all the question is around our 10 most used e -sites in the City of 
Cape Town and what are the details. So as (a), 10 most used sites in the City 
of Cape Town. The Western Cape Government eCentres Programme has 82 
eCentres across the province. Currently we have four Western Cape eCentres 
in the City of Cape Town's municipal area:  
 
• One at Delft Nex Indawo -Yethu;  
• One at Wale Street;  
• One at Philippi Village; and  
• One in Vrygrond.  
 
Based on our statistics of the last four months the Delft Nex Indawo -Yethu 
Western Cape Government e -site is currently the most used eCentre in Cape 
Town. Between the four eCentres located in Cape Town the Delft Nex 
Indawo -Yethu records the highest number of user sessions.  
 
So that is obviously how they measure them. They are called user sessions. 
So, it depends. They might be on for a number of hours, but if I look at the 
last four months in that reporting, Delft Nex, if I go to January, 3  460 user 
sessions, 3  440 in February, 2  422 in March and 1  373 in April. So that is 
10  666 user sessions at that site. Wale Street also each month, 1  159 in 
63 
 
January, 967 in February, 950 in March, 936 in April. That is a total of 4  012 
user sessions. Philippi Village, same thing, month -by -month, 570, 785, 765 
and 534. That is 2  663, and then 409, 446, 606, 468 as the user sessions in 
Vrygrond, taking a total to 1  929.  
 
Section (b), the Delft Nex Indawo -Yethu Western Cape eCentre is located in 
Delft, Cape Town. The eCentre is situated inside the Nex Hope Cape Town 
facility. That address is in 54 Vuurlelie  Crescent, Roosendal, Delft. The 
number of computers there are 22 in the access room and the number of 
computer training rooms, that is not applicable. Of course it is in that Nex 
Centre. So there are a lot of other facilities around the Nex Centre which 
probably could be used as breakaways if you needed to do, etcetera.  
 
The Wale Street address is right here, 9 Wale Street. That has 10 computers 
and the same around training rooms would apply.  
 
Philippi Village in the eCentre is located in Philippi in Cape Town. If you 
know where Philippi Village is, that is at the old cement factory in Philippi. 
That has nine computers and it actually has… the number of computers in the 
training room is 12.  
 
In Vrygrond, that is at the New World Foundation. That is Vrygrond Avenue 
in Vrygrond. That has 14 computers in the access room and 12 in the training 
room.  
 
64 
 
Then (b)(ii). The most accessed services based on the monthly regional 
reports are as follows:  
 
• Updated CVs.  
• Apply for online job applications.  
• Government services online include applications for online school 
admissions and tertiary institutions.  
• SARS e -filing.  
• Free ICT skills training.  
• Scholars and students doing research for assignments.  
• Emails and social media.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker takes the Chair.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon Premier. I see the hon member 
Van Minnen.  
 
Ms B M VAN MINNEN (DA):   Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
My question is what is the impact of Broadband 2.0 on the lives of people 
who are now accessing these centres?  
 
The PREMIER:   Thank you very much for that question.  
 
I think first of all, I mean I think what people are accessing in these service 
65 
 
centres really shows what people are using them for and when you get free 
access it is how economies are changed, and what is really exciting for me, I 
remember when we first did the trials of these access centres, those first 
trials, it was about students doing research for projects at school and it is 
interesting how that has moved down the list a bit.  
 
I always said if that is all that we achieved it would be all that is needed, but 
to see that it is actually about CVs and job applications and e -filing and that 
really is exciting for me because that talks about jobs and the economy, 
which at the end of the day really is how does this platform enable us as a 
society to improve where we are, find opportunities, especially linked to jobs 
and economic growth, which changes your life absolutely and then of course 
underlying that is education, empowering yourself, enabling yourself either 
on skills training exercises or getting online applications at school or tertiary 
institutions.  
 
So I think between those two that really says to me this kind of platform 
gives you a massive opportunity to change your life and really in places that 
really need it, and it is really amazing that in a place like Philippi, who also 
suffers massively because of crime levels, etcetera, and you are finding these 
interventions making a real difference in people's lives, that is actually how 
the violence prevention side linked to all of the other programmes we have 
started to change people's lives and make it safer and more opportunities.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon members, with 18 seconds remaining I see no 
66 
 
further follow -ups with regards to the relevant question. I will then conclude 
this part of our session.  
 
So that is the end of Oral Questions as printed. Outstanding replies will be 
printed in Hansard.  
 
Hon members, we will now move in terms of Rule 204 in terms of Questions 
to the Premier without Notice. I have been informed that the relevant draw 
was administered by the administration and I will now see the hon member 
Kamfer.  
 
QUESTIONS TO THE PREMIER WITHOUT NOTICE  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon members in the 
House, MEC Londt, are you here? To you, hon Deputy Speaker. 
[Interjections .] I have your book.  
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Dankie.  
[An HON MEMBER: Thank you. ] 
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):  Hon Deputy Speaker, allow me to the †agb Premier. 
Agb Premier, gegewe dat die winterstorms na verwagting binne ŉ paar weke, 
oor ŉ paar maande sal begin en die herstelwerk aan die oorstroming van die 
R303 in die Weskus buitekant Citrusdal vertraag is en nog nie voltooi nie – 
yes  – watter onmiddellike maatreëls neem die Provinsiale Regering om 
67 
 
konstruksie te bespoedig en te verhoed dat duisende weer weens 
padineensto rting afgesny is, en buitekant die dorp bly. Step up . Dankie.  [hon 
Premier.  Hon Premier, given that the winter storms wil begin within a few 
weeks, in a few months, and the repairwork to the flooding of the R303 in the 
West Coast outside Citrusdal has been delayed and is still not completed – 
yes – what immediate measures is the Provincial Government taking to speed 
up construction and to prevent that thousands are cut off as a result of road 
collapse, and remain outside the town. Step up . Thank you .]  
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much to the hon member for that question 
and it is evident that †ons Minister is op dit [our Minister is on it ] and he 
stepped up because, of course I do not really know all the detail of that site, 
but right here it says on the exact question:  
 
“Good progress on MR310. If all goes according  to plan two -way 
traffic by Thursday this week.”  
 
So I am sorry to the hon member, you might be looking for some failure, but 
it is quite interesting the question on that site because last time the hon 
member was asking questions about fires and things. He was still going on 
about the fires when they were put out by the teams already and on this site 
specifically, [Interjections.] the kind of money that is being spent on 
redeveloping a new way of dealing with floods.  
 
So in other words the new canals that have been, or the new culverts that 
68 
 
have been designed have been designed specifically because climate change 
is affecting towns like this and I think about this question by this hon 
member in context of a road in the middle of Johannesburg and there is 
definitely …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Are you the Premier of Joburg now?  
 
The PREMIER:  There is definitely …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Are you the Premier of Joburg?  
 
The PREMIER:   You can feel the contrast, you can see the contrast.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Are you the Premier of Joburg?  
 
The PREMIER:  I have been there myself to see it. I have engaged with the 
other role -players, which is the agri -sector, because it is not only the 
building of the road or the new bridge which is being constructed, 
[Interjections.] it is not only that bridge and the redesign of the culverts. I 
mean this, we could have just filled it up again like last time, but we know it 
is going to wash away.  
 
So we have got to, with climate change, put extra design in. We have got to 
spend more money on making sure that it does not happen again and so one is 
that culvert design that I spoke about, which is really innovative. I have gone 
69 
 
and stood there with the Minister in the middle of those culverts, engaged 
with those companies who got those contracts, who are putting them in place 
and the photograph I have just seen is seeing those tar layers going on the 
top.  
 
I think that is an outstanding effort from this Department in getting us 
prepared for what we knew as a major one in 100 year flood that took place.  
 
Another part of that specific issue is the silting up of the river and how in 
that bridge the silt has over many years built up and then the reeds take hold 
in that silt, and that is actually probably the main cause, because we have got 
this pipeline which is under a bridge which now gets filled half of it with 
sand and of course when the water comes down it then spreads out and 
destroys roads and infrastructure and floods people's homes, etcetera, 
etcetera.  
 
So I really think that this is an outstanding investment and an outstanding 
response to a major infrastructure damage from, and if I remember correctly 
in those floods, 153 I think was the number of roads that were damaged and 
closed, and while this Minister repairs not only that bridge, we have a look at 
all of these other roads over the last year that have been repaired, reopened, 
put in place.  
 
There is no other province in South Africa that is able to respond to that kind 
of disaster with the speed that is being responded to here, and it is 
70 
 
outstanding.  
 
I mean one would think that this was a sweetheart question from one of my 
own members, because it gives me the ability to actually talk about our 
response versus, I said think about that road that blew up with that a gas 
explosion in the middle of Gauteng.  
 
Actually think about the floods from three years ago that happened in KZN 
and still those infrastructure [Interjections.] canals are not repaired.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   You cannot compare [Inaudible]. You cannot compare 
it.  
 
The PREMIER:   They are not repaired yet, and if they have floods again 
…[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  No, you cannot compare.  
 
The PREMIER:   …the chances are that Toyota will not rebuild that factory 
[Interjections.] and that is what shows you the difference between a 
responsible government and a responsive government who really applies their 
mind, brings in good planning and actually deals with a big issue that we are 
facing, what is called climate change.  
 
We are getting more water over much shorter periods of time and in actual 
71 
 
fact this is just the tip of the iceberg, because all of built environment across 
our country is built with certain formulae. It says that for so much square 
metres of paved area you need a drainpipe this big. Well, I am sorry, you 
need a drainpipe this big now.  
 
We need to double up. We need to build bigger infrastructure and imagine 
you have to rebuild almost every single town and city's drainage 
infrastructure across South Africa to deal with this climate change that is 
coming at us, and of course that is exactly what the Minister 
…[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Thank you.  
 
The PREMIER:   …has been doing in this case. Thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon members, just to remind yourself, the person 
posing the question has two follow -ups. Hon member Kamfer?  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy 
Speaker, †ongelukkig, agb Adjunkspeaker, moet ek die  [unfortunately, hon 
Deputy Speaker, I have to ] true – I must give you the true facts 
…[Interjections.]  
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Die regte feite.  
[An HON MEMBER:  The true facts. ] 
72 
 
 
Mr F KAMER (ANC):   …and I must question , I must question it to the hon 
Premier.  
 
†Wanneer laas was die agb Premier of sy adviseur self op ŉ ter plaatse 
ondersoek? Ek het gister oor die brug geloop en weer ŉ ompad gery. Daar is 
nog geen move dat dit na ŉ kant toe gaan kom nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek het 
gister daar gery, ek ry nog daar uit en in. Ek het nog nie in die stad verblyf 
gehad nie.  
[When last did the hon Premier or his adviser have bee n on an on -site 
investigation? I walked across the bridge yesterday and again took a detour. 
There is still no move that it is going to come to some direction. 
[Interjections.] I drove there yesterday, I still drive there out and in. I stll 
have not stayed in the town. ] 
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Jy lief.  
[An HON MEMBER: You love. ] 
 
†Mnr F KAMFER (ANC):   Dit is een ...[Tussenwerpsels.]  
[Mr F KAMFER (ANC):  It is one ...[Interjections.] ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon member Kamfer, I want to caution you that is 
already one question. [Inter jections.] I would not want you to overstep and 
miss your opportunity. [Interjections.] Hon Premier, that is the first question. 
[Interjections.]  
73 
 
 
The PREMIER:   So, hon member, [Interjections.] of course the road is not 
open. I am looking at the photographs, the current photograph of that road, it 
has still got wet tar on it. You have got to drive around the wet tar, 
[Interjections.] but the point is, the point is he is driving, the hon member is 
driving on a construction site [Interjections.] where you ar e repairing damage 
from a major flood. That is the point. [Interjections.]  
 
Go and drive in any of those other places where nothing has happened, 
[Interjections]  † nada, niks, [nothing ] in three years.  
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Wanneer was jy daar?  
[An HON MEMBER:  W hen were you there? ] 
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Wanneer was jy daar?  
[An HON MEMBER:  When were you there? ] 
 
The PREMIER:  In this province we get things done.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Hear -hear!  
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Wanneer was jy daar? Vandag?  
[An HON MEMBER:  When were you ther e?  Today? ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon member Kamfer, are you utilising your final 
74 
 
follow -up?  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   Yes, hon Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.]  
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Wanneer was jy daar?  
[An HON MEMBER:  When were you there? ] 
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   H on Deputy Speaker, I understand and I see the 
pictures.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Ja.  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   My last question is how much money has this 
Department spent? ‘23 that happened  on the same bridge. ’24 that happened  
…[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  The same.  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   …the same bridge broken. What is the plan of the 
Department in the future and how much money was spent for the repairs of 
this road? Thank you. [Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   I wanted to give you leniency based that you were 
the first person to draw, but I will allow the hon Premier to answer.  
 
75 
 
An HON MEMBER:   Where is the book?  
 
The PREMIER:   The hon member must know that the [Interjections.] bridge 
did not wash away. He just said the bridge washed away. The bridge did not 
wash away. So he must not come and spew nonsense here.  
 
The second thing [Interjections.] is the first R5  million wash away… 
[Incomplete.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon Premier, I see hon member Sayed. 
[Interjections.]  
 
† ‘n AGBARE LID:  Ai, man.  
[An HON MEMBER:   Oh, man. ] 
 
The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION:  Hon Deputy Speaker, I beg for your 
indulgence. [Interjections.] I know you will indulge me on this one. I think 
the hon Premier is getting hot under the collar. [Interjections.]  
 
He is leading Government, he leads Government. [Interjections.] He must 
carry himself like a leader of government, not as if he is a backbencher and 
fighting here. [Interjections.] They must calm down, respond properly. There 
is no need to use words such as saying the hon member is talking nonsense. 
[Interjections.] That is totally out of order. Just respond. Thank you. 
[Interjections.]  
76 
 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon members [Interjections.] – hon members, we 
are doing extremely well today. I would want us to continue in order to 
ensure that those that are in the gallery, those that are listening, are 
ultimately benefiting from these debates and discussions. [Interjections.] I 
see hon member Kamfer.  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy 
Speaker …[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   You rise on a point of order?  
 
Mr F KAMFER (ANC):   Yes, on a point of order, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
†Ek voel die agb Premier raak my aan. Hy moet withdraw, agb 
Adjunkspeaker. [Tussenwerpsels.]  [I feel the hon Premier is insulting me. He 
must withdraw, hon Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.] ] 
 
An HON MEMBER:   Withdraw.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I do not regard that particular [Interjections.] word 
as deeply unparliamentary. I would, however, once again state that the 
discussions and the debates in this particular House is by its very nature 
highly political and I will encourage hon members to remain calm and to 
allow for the debate to proceed.  
77 
 
 
Hon member Nkondlo, as you rising on the same matter?  
 
Ms N D NKONDLO (ANC):  Hon Deputy Speaker, I just want to check with 
yourself.  
 
Do you regard when another hon member says to another he is speaking 
nonsense, that is part of being highly political in a debate? Is that what you 
are saying?  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   It is very clear. It is very clear in this House, the 
debates that are ongoing. In this House, hon members, we have heard worse 
on what hon members say on how people are engaging. [Interjections.]  
 
I am not going to have the debate now. I will allow the hon Premier to 
proceed. The time is running out. This opportunity does not come along every 
Sitting where we are able to ask questions to the Premier without notice. So 
we will proceed. [Interjections.]  
 
The PREMIER:   Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker. To avoid any 
kind of confusion here, hon member, I withdraw and apologise for saying that 
you were spewing nonsense.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Thank you, it is the right thing to do. [Interjections.]  
 
78 
 
The PREMIER:  I would like to say, hon Deputy Speaker, in… [Incomplete.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   [Inaudible.] call it nonsense, then you must accept. 
[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Premier …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Now you realise.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   I am not going to have the debate in this regard, 
hon Premier, and I will caution hon members. Hon Premier.  
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much and thank you to the hon member for 
the question. I would just like to correct the hon member in that the last three 
floods and washaways in that very area, where I have personally been every 
single time, the bridge itself has not washed away. So that is incorrect, but 
the washaways have occurred on the roadway leading up to the bridge.  
 
I think the hon member also knows that, and of course now I have got to be 
careful because I am not stating exact facts because I do not have the budget 
in front of me, but to actually put a proper correction there we actually need 
to rebuild the causeway all the way from the main freeway to the bridge. That 
is just short of a billion, R800  million I think is what that would need and we 
do not have that kind of budget at the moment, but the budget that is being 
spent is being spent on these new innovations and these new spaces, like 
79 
 
what I have just said around the culvert.  
 
What I have just quickly got across the floor, because of course these are 
questions to the Premier without notice. So I do not know what the hon 
member is going to ask me. I would be prepared. I try and bring a lot of stuff 
with me so that I am trying to anticipate questions so that I can give 
responsible answers in the House. You know, we are the only province that 
actually does this and I want to do it properly and I want to do it well.  
 
So what I have just – and luckily my colleague sits right next to me. So we 
are talking about R5  million for the first washaway and we are talking about 
R10  million for the second washaway. The first washaway and the second 
washaway are different spaces. It is not exactly the same place that washed 
away again.  
 
Of course as I have said already that it is about saying within our means, we 
cannot build a R1  billion or R800  million new causeway for the whole way, 
but what we can do and try and respond, as the hon member said, as quickly 
as possible before the next flood season happens, that we do get this in place 
and of course that is the urgency that the Department is putting in place.  
 
That is why the hon Minister keeps following it up, saying, “Where are we on 
it?” and he can actually show me that the message he got this morning 
already was, “Hon Minister, we should be opening it to two -way traffic on 
Thursday.”  
80 
 
 
I mean I think that is really great news and to see the speed in which they 
have rebuilt, and I mean those culverts, the hon member knows the work that 
went into those culverts, the reinforcing, the concrete, the depth that had to 
be dug down to make sure that those culverts are going to respond to 
potential new flooding again.  
 
In addition to that it is not only what this Department is doing, it is the 
money that the Department is also transferring from the Agriculture 
Department to the Water Users Associations and the agri -sector to make sure 
that we actually get the riverbed cleaned again, because that is also a big 
issue and also do not hold me to the exact number, but I think we are talking 
about two transfers and we are probably sitting in the region of 15 to 
R18  million that has been spent now in that region to make sure that we are 
cleaning out the river space so that we can also mitigate that risk. Open up 
the culverts, open up the drainage systems and of course that is what we try 
and do across every one of our municipalities now as we are moving towards 
potential winter rainfall and winter flooding time. Thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon Premier. I see the hon member 
Masipa.  
 
Mr N P MASIPA (DA):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Through you, hon 
Deputy Speaker, with regards to the question to the hon Premier.  
 
81 
 
With regards to exports and their contribution to the Western Cape economy, 
what collaborative interventions has the Western Cape Government 
undertaken to ensure that the Port of Cape Town effectively delivers on its 
mandate in support of Growth for Jobs Strategy? I thank you, hon Deputy 
Speaker.  
 
The PREMIER:  Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker. I think we all 
know that the Port of Cape Town in its global efficiency ranking sits right 
there at the bottom, which is really unacceptable. We cannot have a conduit 
to the economy blocked like it is.  
 
I was just seeing [Interjections.] – I said that I brought documents to help me 
with these kind of things. I was actually – I first want to respond to say that 
myself, hon Minister Sileku, hon Minister Meyer, the Mayor, the MACO 
member for Mobility in the City, had a meeting with Minister Barbara Creecy 
towards the end of last year with specific reference to the Port of Cape Town, 
because we cannot have this conduit for jobs in the economy blocked like it 
is.  
 
I want to say and I will say in this House to Minister Creecy, thank you very 
much, because she responded to us in that meeting that she would act 
decisively and quickly and make sure that we get our rail and our port out to 
concessions.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   What does that mean? A private entity [Inaudible.]  
82 
 
 
The PREMIER:  I really am excited about that. Just like the private entity in 
Durban Port …[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Please speak to the Chair, hon Premier.  
 
The PREMIER:  Just like the private entity in Durban Port [Interjections.] 
that the ANC has put in place, we want exactly the same thing in the Cape 
Town Port and with the rail, because she has put out the rail and the ports for 
requests for information.  
 
So publicly I want to say to her thank you very much, Minister, for taking 
that next step in moving away from broken, failed policy of the last 30 years 
and let us move towards global best practice and how we actually can 
compete globally. That is the first thing.  
 
The second thing I must say that our own Port interaction [Interjections.] – I 
do not know if the …[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, hon members.  
 
The PREMIER:   …hon members are listening, but our own interaction 
through hon Minister Meyer’s team in the Port and the delivery, thank you 
now for the rubber tyred gantries, the first ones have arrived, and that is 
going to make a massive difference.  
83 
 
 
If we go back a year we were all excited because we managed to find some 
second -hand rubber tyred gantries, but they did not fit and they did not work 
and they were broken and old and unserviceable. We have got brand new 
ones, the first tranche has arrived, and we will be getting a number of 
tranches this year so that we really start to get those efficiencies lifted.  
 
There I want to say thank you to Transnet and Michelle Phillips and the work 
that she is doing alongside our team to make sure that we find those 
efficiencies. I mean we are now in the midst of our citrus exports.  
 
The previous question was about the roads and the ability of our roads to be 
repaired before the winter season. We know how those road blockages and 
floods blocked our ability to get citrus to market, specifically †vanaf Weskus 
[from West Coast .] We have got to make sure tha t these pipelines and 
blockages are open and removed.  
 
Then of course it is how we get those port operators to come into our market 
through a tender process, through an open bid process, to give us the 
efficiencies that we need that will get our products to market so we do not 
lose market share to our competitors in South America or in Australia or 
wherever else with those products that are moving through our port, or at the 
moment not moving through our port quick enough.  
 
I also want to say that I was looking at a document because we have just 
84 
 
come back from the UAE and we engaged with Dubai Port, that now operates 
60 ports around the world across every single continent, and it is amazing to 
see those efficiencies they are finding in those countries where they came in, 
and that is exactly what we are trying to achieve.  
So I really hope that when this process is concluded we will find operators 
coming out of other parts …[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude.  
 
The PREMIER:  …of the world… [Incomplete.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude.  
 
The PREMIER:   Other parts of the world that are really going to be efficient, 
because our port used to be efficient.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Your time is up! [Interjections.]  
 
The PREMIER:   In 2012 we could move 33 …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Your time is up!  
 
The PREMIER:  …standards …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  I said your time is up!  
85 
 
 
The PREMIER:  …and we reduced that right down …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Your time is up!  
 
The PREMIER:   …to inefficient rates of 14 at a time, and that is just 
unacceptable.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Your time is up!  
 
The PREMIER:  We have got to get our game up. We have got to be 
competitive.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you so much, hon Premier.  
 
The PREMIER:  We have got to get [Inaudible.] going. Thank you very much.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you so much. Hon members, that concludes 
Questions to the Premier Without Notice. In terms of Rule 145 we will now 
deal with Members’ Statements and I will see the DA.  
 
MEMBER STATEMENTS  
 
Mr N P MASIPA (DA):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Today, on the 80 th  
anniversary of victory in Europe, we honour the courage of those who stood 
86 
 
against the tide of tyranny, among them over 334  000 South Africans. 
Volunteers from every corner of our then divided land answered the call to 
fight fascism long before the world fully grasped its horror.  
 
From the unforgiving deserts of North Africa to the shadowed hills of Italy, 
South African troops fought with tenacity and resolve. In the Northern 
African campaign the First South African Infantry Division helped turn the 
tide. At Operation Crusader they broke the siege of Tobruk at El Alamein. 
Our engineers crawled through minefields under fire so others could advance, 
and then came Italy.  
 
In 1944 the Sixth South African Armoured Division landed in the birthplace 
of fascism, fighting through dust and mud towards Europe. At the shadow of 
Monte Cassino under fire our troops endured. As General Dwight D 
Eisenhower described the Sixth Armoured Division was, I quote:  
 
“A magnificent fighting force, courageous and capable.”  
 
Many of our soldiers fought in separate units, unequal in pay, weaponry and 
rights, and yet they fought together against a greater evil. They fought for a 
world better than the one that they came from.  
 
Let us pause to remember the thousands of South African soldiers who never 
returned home, those who fell in the sands of El Alamein, in the rubble of 
Cassino or in the skies above Europe. Their names may be etched in stone or 
87 
 
lost onto the wind, but their bravery endures. They died not only for victory, 
but for the hope of a freer, fairer world.  
 
Today we carry the memory forward with pride, with sorrow and with eternal 
gratitude. Let us remember them not only as soldiers of war, but as soldiers 
of principle. Warriors [Inaudible.]. Thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you, hon member Masipa.  
 
Mr N P MASIPA (DA):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Your time has expired. I recognise the ANC.  
 
The CHIEF WHIP (ANC):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy 
Speaker, the Western Cape Government, under the Premier's watch, has 
abandoned our elderly and neglected them. Indignity and suffering, the 
horrific conditions of KSE Kraaifontein Tehuis are not an isolated incident. 
They are a damning indictment of this Government's dereliction of duty and 
heartless disregard for our vulnerable citizens.  
 
Nineteen years ago a serious allegation of abuse, rape and horrific conditions 
at this very home were investigated by the then MEC, MEC Kholeka 
Mqulwana. In 2025 these horrors are back.  
 
A viral post by social justice activist Bianca Booysen revealed shocking 
88 
 
allegations of rape, abuse, filth and elders left to lie in their own faeces. This 
prompted ANC members to urgently visit the facility. What we saw was 
heartbreaking. There are only three nurses over 130 residents, no emergency 
call buttons in the rooms, frail elders soaked in mattress without blankets, 
sheets or diapers and no dietician.  
 
Though the Provincial Government allocates R1,4  million per quarter, 
majority of it goes to salaries not care. SASSA grants meant for the elderly 
are being used to buy groceries.  
 
Last year seven residents reportedly died within two weeks due to neglect, 
yet the hon Premier and his MEC have done nothing. This is not just bad 
governance, it is disgrace. It is a tragedy unfolding before our eyes. This is 
another Life Esidimeni in the making.  
 
A 2019 forensic report exposed mismanagement and called for action, 
including investigations by Ms Nondumiso Chona, yet  nothing has happened. 
The facility board operates illegally with only three members instead of 
seven. Why the silence?  
 
The hon Premier cannot plead ignorance. The death, squalor and despair in 
our old age homes have been well -documented and yet there has been no 
action, no urgency, no justice, just silence and suffering.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Your time has expired, hon member Bans.  
89 
 
 
The CHIEF WHIP (ANC):  We welcome the visit of our Human Rights 
Commissioner, Chris Nissen, to the home yesterday. We hope that the DA 
Government will do something about it. Thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you so much, hon member Bans. I see the 
PA.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   They must step up. [Interjections.]  
 
Ms D R STEPHENS (PA):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy 
Speaker, I rise today with a heavy heart and a deep sense of responsibility to 
bring this House's attention to the ongoing crisis at Benevolent Park Old Age 
Home in Mossel Bay, a place that should be a sanctuary for the elderly, but 
which has sadly become a space of instability, fear and mismanagement.  
 
As previously highlighted the law is clear. We have a legal and moral 
obligation to protect and care for the elderly in our province. The residents in 
Benevolent Park, our mothers, fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers, 
deserve dignity, not distress.  
 
It is unacceptable that instead of receiving the care and protection they 
deserve these residents are being intimidated, silenced and even dragged into 
legal battles merely for expressing concern about their living conditions or 
the conduct of those meant to serve them.  
90 
 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, we are now witnessing a troubling pattern. The very 
same governance and interference issues are being reported at Kraaifontein 
Old Age Home, Oudtshoorn Old Age Home and several others across the 
Western Cape. We cannot and will not remain silent.  
 
On behalf of the Patriotic Alliance I therefore call on the Western Cape 
Provincial Parliament and the relevant departments to first:  
 
• Urgently intervene at Benevolent Park, Kraaifontein Old Age Home and 
other affected facilities.  
• Establish an independent task team or the existing committee to assess 
the governance, care standards and the role of municipalities and board 
members in the mismanagement of these homes.  
• Ensure that any court cases or legal actions against residents simply for 
voicing their opinions are dropped or withdrawn immediately.  
• Implement a provincial oversight mechanism that protects the rights 
and voices of the elderly and ensures these institutions are run with 
accountability and compassion.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, we cannot preach about dignity and human rights while 
turning a blind eye to the mistreatment of those who build this country with 
their hands and hearts.  
 
The Patriotic Alliance will not sit back …[Interjections.]  
91 
 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude, hon member.  
 
Ms D R STEPHENS (PA):   …while our elders are disrespected, neglected 
and ill -treated. We urge the House to act decisively, not tomorrow, not next 
month, but today. Thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you so much, hon member Stephens. I see 
the DA.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Where is Minister Londt?  
 
An H ON MEMBER:   There is a crisis.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   It is a crisis [Inaudible.] [Interjections.]  
 
†Mnr T WALTERS (DA):   Afrikaans word al vir veel meer as net 100 jaar 
gepraat en geskryf, maar tydens 2025 en spesifiek vandag, 8  Mei, word die 
taal amptelik erken vir die 100ste bestaansjaar as ŉ landstaal, ŉ amptelike 
landstaal.  
 
Afrikaans is ingeboesem in die kultuur van die Wes -Kaap. Sonder Afrikaans 
sou gesprekke darem regtig vervelig gewees het. Afrikaans is ŉ kragtige 
vorm van uitdrukking, al is jou moedertaal Engels of isiXhosa, en meeste 
Suid -Afrikaners skel graag in Afrikaans wanneer die Bokke of Bafana 
92 
 
verloor.  
 
Dit is ŉ pragtige mengelmoes van Nederlands, Portugees en Afrika -tale wat 
eintlik meer as ŉ taal geskep het. Vir talle Suid -Afrikaners weerspieël dit 
hulle unieke kultuur en diversiteit. Dit verbind gemeenskappe en bou 
verstandhouding.  
 
Die viering van hierdie eeufees is ŉ geleentheid om hulde te bring aan al die 
digters, skrywers, opvoeders, kunstenaars en gewone Afrikaanssprekendes, en 
die verskillende Afrikaanse dialekte wat Afrikaans vorm en uitbou. Die taal 
is lewendig en veerkragtig en nuwe woorde en slagspreuke word elke dag 
geskep in ons gemeenskappe.  
 
Die herdenking is ook ŉ geleentheid om ons ryk geskiedenis te herdenk, 
gesprek te voer oor dinge wat nog krap en fees te vier in jou taal, terwyl ons 
seker maak dat ons Afrikaans se toekoms bewaar.  
 
Mag ons altyd saamwerk om alle tale te bevorder vir die verspreiding van 
diversiteit en dit herken as ŉ waardevolle deel van ons kultuur. Dit is hoe ons 
Suid -Afrika se wonderlike meertalige toekoms bewaar.  
[Mr T WALTERS (DA):   Afrikaans has been spoken and written for more 
than just a 100 years, but during 2025 and specifically today, 8 May, the 
language is officially acknowledged for the 100th y ear as an official 
language, a country’s official language.  
 
93 
 
Afrikaans is embedded in the culture of the Western Cape. Without Afrikaans 
conversations would really have been very boring. Afrikaans is a powerful 
form of expression, even if your mother tongue is English or isiXhosa, and 
most South Africans like to swear in Afrikaans when the Boks or Bafana lose.  
 
It is a beautiful mixture of Dutch, Portuguese and African languages that 
have created actually more than a language.  For many South Africans it 
reflects their unique culture and diversity.  It connects communities and 
builds understanding.  
 
The celebration of this centenary is an opportunity to honour all the poets, 
writers, educators, artists and ordinary Afrikaans -speaking people, and the 
various Afrikaans dialects constituting and building Afrikaans.  The language 
is lively and resilient and new words and slogans are created every day in our 
communities.   
 
The commemoration is also an opportunity to honour our rich history, discuss 
things that are still bothering us and celebrate in your language, while are we 
ensure that we protect the future of our Afrikaans.  
 
May we always work together to promote all languages for the distribution of 
diversity and acknowledge it as a precious part of our culture.  That is how 
we conserve South Africa’s wonderful multilanguage future. ]   
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you, hon member Walters. I see the EFF. 
94 
 
[Interjections.]  
 
Ms A CASSIEM (EFF):   Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The EFF extends its 
condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the three SAPS members 
whose lives were tragically cut short and whose bodies, along with two 
civilians, were recently recovered in a river in Gauteng. The EFF commends 
the rescue and investigation teams who worked tirelessly to recover the five 
bodies, utilising drone technology and enduring challenging conditions to 
bring the remains home.  
 
In addition to the three SAPS members identified, two other bodies were also 
identified and recovered. The development is deeply concerning and the 
presence of multiple bodies in one river system within a short timeframe and 
geographic radius suggests a broader and possibly coordinated pattern of 
violence and demands urgent and thorough investigation.  
 
The EFF urges authorities to work with urgency to identify the last individual 
and to notify their families. No family should have to endure uncertainty 
about the fate of their loved ones and every life lost is [Inaudible.] justice 
and closure.  
 
In conclusion, hon Deputy Speaker, the EFF calls for a full  and transparent 
investigation into the deaths of SAPS officers and civilians and the National 
Police Minister must provide answers, not only to the families, but to the 
police, about what happened, why and who must be held accountable. The 
95 
 
country deserves to know whether these are isolated incidents or something 
far more criminal and sinister.  
 
May the souls of the departed rest in revolutionary peace. We hold their 
loved ones in our thoughts and remain committed to demanding answers and 
justice in their name.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you, hon member Cassiem. I see the NCC.  
 
Mr D G JACOBS (NCC):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Greetings to all. I 
greet you all in the name of the Highest . 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the NCC is shocked to see that the DA MP, Michael 
Bagraim, has on 29  April posted a written question to the Minister of 
Employment and Labour relating to employment equity stats, the definition 
of Coloured versus Black and employment of Coloureds in general.  
 
Now, hon Deputy Speaker, what is even more shocking in this instance is that 
the very, very same MP Bagraim has a history of dismissing Coloured 
employees at the CCMA and at the Labour Court.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, because of this MP many Coloured employees have lost 
their cases at court or better yet, many cases do not even reach the court. The 
bribing in connection at courts has seen many sexual predators walk free.  
 
96 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, this MP got full control over the employment sector. He 
even controlled the Labour Practise Council. Can you believe that?  
 
Now one of the most recent shocking incidents is where he represented 
D G Outsource, an online gambling platform administrator, against claims of 
abuse where Coloured women, Coloured female employees are involved.  
 
Now Lisa Smit, she lost her job. Today she is still unemployed. She is 
fighting for justice and her financial losses. Senusha Rahman, an employee at 
the very same company, committed suicide as she could not deal with this 
pressure of abuse and it was reported, but obviously †weet ons wie is die 
mannetjie wat vir haar afgeskiet het [we know who the man is who shot her 
down. ] 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  It is so sad.  
 
Mr D G JACOBS (NCC):   …these are the stories that we hear every day and 
to see MP Bagraim acting as a protector for the workers of the Coloured 
people in particular, asking questions to the Minister, is a slap in the face of 
the law -abiding workers of this country.  
 
In the Western Cape Coloured people in particular suffer the most in terms of 
employment opportunities. So how can the very same people that want to see 
97 
 
us fail want to now speak out as our superheroes?  
 
No, hon Deputy Speaker, 2026 is around the corner †en onse mense se oë is 
oop. Ek sê maar net. [and our people’s eyes are open. I’m just saying. ] 
Amase.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon member Jacobs. I see the ANC.  
 
Ms N D NKONDLO (ANC):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. The ANC 
wishes to state its unwavering support to the rights of all as enshrined in the 
Constitution of South Africa and that we shall never stand with anyone nor 
laws that discriminate people on the basis of their race, colour, creed and 
sexual orientation.  
 
This we boldly state against the rogue behaviour of the Federal Chairperson 
of the DA, former member of this House and former Premier of this Province, 
Helen Zille, who in celebration of an unfortunate UK ruling against trans 
women said, I quote:  
 
“They have protected the rights of the women across the 
English -speaking world.”  
 
Equating trans women to a contagion as dangerous socially as COVID was 
medically. This hateful vitriol against trans women is testimony of how 
Helen Zille and her DA ilk are disgustingly hypocritical. This hypocrisy must 
98 
 
be called out as against the South Africa we stand on.  
 
Helen Zille has always been found with such far right views and as a blue 
eyed magogo  is not reined in by her very own party that has falsely purported 
itself to be friends of the LBTQIA Plus community, including being a partner 
and a founder of the Cape Town Pride.  
 
The City, under the DA, will be hosting the World Pride in 2027 here in Cape 
Town, yet we have such a leader with a very warped view of gender equality 
in modern times, as by the poem against the Holocaust by Pastor Martin 
Niemöller.  
 
Let us remind opportunists in the DA, the poem goes:  
 
“First they came for the communist and I did not speak out. Then 
they came out for the Jews and I did not speak out, and then they 
came for me and there was no one left to speak out for me.”  
 
This is a message to the DA and your opportunistic silence.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   I recognise the DA. [Interjections.] Order, hon 
members! I see the DA.  
 
Ms W KAIZER -PHILANDER (DA):   Thank you very much, hon Deputy 
Speaker. On this World Red Cross and Red Crescent Day we pause to pay 
99 
 
tribute to the heart of humanitarian work in our province.  
 
The NGOs, civil society groups and volunteers who serve tirelessly in 
communities across the Western Cape. These are the people who respond first 
when disaster strikes. The ones who deliver meals in the cold, comfort the 
victims of violence [Interjections.] and provide shelter, hope and healing to 
those most in need. They are the pulse of compassion in our province.  
 
The DA -led Western Cape Government recognises this work not just with 
words, but with action. Over the past five years the Department of Social 
Development has strengthened… [Incomplete.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  [Inaudible.] call me, I want to know. [Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you – you may continue, hon member.  
 
Ms W KAIZER -PHILANDER (DA):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. The 
DA -led Western Cape Government recognises this work not just with words, 
but with action. Over the past five years the Department of Social 
Development has strengthened its partnership with the sector, offering real, 
practical support.  
 
Through the NPO Help Desk and Institutional Capacity Building Programme 
over 2  700 organisations have received support to strengthen their 
governance and impact.  
100 
 
 
A groundbreaking partnership with the United Nations Development 
Programme is enhancing resource mobilisation and institutional resilience 
among our NGO partners. Last year nearly 33  000 individuals accessed 
psychosocial services and more than 19  500 families received vital support 
through the Family Preservation Programme.  
 
An additional R3  million was allocated in 2024 to boost humanitarian 
response capacity in the face of fires, floods and food insecurity. These 
numbers represent lives changed because of strong partnerships and shared 
purpose. To every organisation, volunteer and community leader, we see you, 
we thank you and we honour you.  
 
The DEPUTY PLEASE:   Please conclude, hon member.  
 
Ms W KAIZER -PHILANDER (DA):   You remind us that dignity, kindness 
and service are the foundation of a just and caring society. Together we are 
stronger. I thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon member Philander. I see the 
Freedom Front Plus.  
 
†Mnr G MARAIS (FF+):   Agb Adjunkspeaker, vandag is Afrikaans as 
amptelike taal 100 jaar oud.  
 
101 
 
Die Vryheidsfront Plus was op ŉ tyd in die geskiedenis van Suid -Afrika die 
enigste party wat geveg het vir Afrikaans in hierdie land. [Tussenwerpsels.] 
Dr Corné Mulder, ons nasionale leier, het bevestig hy was deel van die 
oorgangsperiode na die nuwe bedeling in 1994 [Tussenwerpsels.] en die 
aanhaling is:  
 
“Toe die ANC en die DA voorgestel het dat Engels die enigste 
amptelike landstaal moet wees.”  
 
Dit was die Vryheidsfront Plus wat alleen geveg het vir die erkenning van 
Afrikaans in Suid -Afrika en terloops, [Tussenwerpsels.] ook ander inheemse 
tale. Afrikaans was die moedertaal van my oorlede ouma en oupa gewees.  
[Mr G MARAIS (FF+):   Hon Deputy Speaker, today Afrikaans as official 
language is 100 years old.  
 
The Freedom Front Plus was at one stage in the history of South Africa  the 
only party that fought for Afrikaans in this country.  [Interjections.] Dr 
Corné Mulder, our national leader, confirmed that he was part of the 
transition period to the new dispensation in 1994 [Interjections.] and the 
quote is:  
 
“Toe die ANC en die DA voorgestel het dat Engels die enigste amptelike 
landstaal moet wees.”  
 
It was the Freedom Front Plus that alone fought for the acknowledgement of 
102 
 
Afrikaans in South Africa, and by the way, [Interjections.] Also other 
indigenous languages.  Afrikaans was the mother tongue of my late 
grandmother and grandfather. ]   
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon member Marais, are you able to take your 
seat? Is that a point of order?  
 
Mr T WALTERS (DA):   Yes. Hon Chair, this is an alternate reality not just 
misleading the House. That is factually not true what is being said there in 
terms of the DA's predecessor organisation. [Interjections.] Even the ANC 
did not support it. It is just not factually true.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Sit down, you are talking nonsense.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you so much [Inaudible.]  
 
Mr T WALTERS (DA):   Hon Chair, are you telling me to sit down or the 
anti -poor party again?  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Sit down! [Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am asking …[Interjections.]  
 
Mr T WALTERS (DA):  Is it yourself? [Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Order, hon members! I am asking 
103 
 
…[Interjections.]  
 
Mr T WALTERS (DA):   Okay, thank you. Thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   …hon member Walters, that is not a point of 
order.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Sit down!  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon member Marais, please conclude. You have 
50 seconds. [Interjections.]  
 
†Mnr G MARAIS (FF+):  Baie dankie, baie dankie, agb Adjunkspeaker. Ja, 
die waarheid maak seer, agb Adjunkspeaker.  
 
Agb Adjunkspeaker, Afrikaans [Tussenwerpsels.] is die moedertaal van my 
ouma en my oupa wat nou oorlede is en ek het nog sy gedigte wat hy geskryf 
het in sy Bybel. Ek is lief vir Afrikaans.  
 
Afrikaans is ook die moedertaal van 70% van die Bruin bevolking in 
Suid -Afrika. Mag Afrikaans nog lank lewe. Lank lewe Afrikaanssprekendes 
in Suid -Afrika en dié wie die taal liefhet, en ek is baie bly dat die DA wat 
destyds in 1994 as die DP – julle naam was mos DP gewees daai tyd? 
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dalk sal dit ŉ bietjie terugbring wat jy vergeet het. 
[Tussenwer psels.]  
104 
 
 
Die Vryheidsfront Plus ...[Tussenwerpsels.]  
[Mr G MARAIS (FF+):  Thank you, thank you hon Deputy Speaker.  Yes, the 
truth hurts, hon Deputy Speaker.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, Afrikaans [Interjections.] is the mother tongue of my 
grandmother and grandfather who are now deceased and I still have his 
poems that he wrote, in his Bible.  I love Afrikaans.   
 
Afrikaans is also the mother tongue of 70% of the Coloured population in 
South Africa. May Afrikaans still live long.  May Afrikaans -speakers in 
South Africa live long and those who love the language, and I am glad that 
the DA that way back in 1994 as the DP – your name was DP in those days?  
[Interjections.] Perhaps it may bring back some that you have forgotten.  
[Interjections.]  
 
The Freedom Front Plus ...[Interjections.] ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Please conclude, member.  
 
†Mnr G MARAIS (FF+):  Die Vryheidsfront Plus verwelkom die...  
[Mr G MARAIS (FF+):  The Freedom Front Plus welcomes the... ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Please conclude, hon member. [Interjections.] 
Order, hon members!  
105 
 
 
†Mnr G MARAIS (FF+):   Baie dankie, agb Adjunkspeaker. 
[Tussenwerpsels.] Beskerm my net teen hierdie stemme wat hierso van die 
linkerkant af kom. [Tussenwerpsels.]  
[Mr G MARAIS (FF+):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.] 
Just protect me against these voices coming here from the left.  
[Interjections.] ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Your time has expired, hon member. 
[Interjections.]  
 
†Mnr G MARAIS (FF+):   Agb Adjunkspeaker, in sluiting, [Tussenwerpsels.] 
ons verwelkom dat die DA ook nou lief is vir Afrikaans. Baie dankie.  
[Mr G MARAIS (FF+):   Hon Deputy Speaker, to conclude, [Interjections.] 
We welcome it that the DA now also love Afrikaans.  Thank you. ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   I would have only entertained  the heckling if it 
was in Afrikaans. Hon members, I now see Al Jama -ah.  
 
Mr G BRINKHUIS (AL JAMA -AH):   Thank you very much, hon Deputy 
Speaker. Hon Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Al Jama -ah we want to wish 
all the Hajj pilgrims from Cape Town and all around the world that is 
embarking on their compulsory Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, the holy land of 
Mecca and Medina, we wish for them a Hajj pilgrimage, magule  and a 
pilgrimage maghroor . I thank you very much, hon Deputy S peaker.  
106 
 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you, hon member Brinkhuis. I see the 
ACDP. [Interjections.]  
 
Mr F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy 
Speaker, Ground Up, a non -profit organisation, news organisation, visited 
SASSA offices yesterday.  
 
Yesterday, hon Deputy Speaker, they visited Athlone and Gugulethu SASSA 
offices. What they found we all know is disturbing, that people in the line in 
Athlone had to be there since 03:00 in the morning. [Interjections.] In 
Gugulethu people were turned away because of the new verification drive by 
SASSA.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the lack of satellite offices in Langa, Bonteheuwel and 
Hanover Park [Interjections.] means that people must travel and spend money 
to get to the SASSA offices.  
 
So the plea to hon Minister Londt is to speak to the National Minister to 
make sure that people that go and draw disability – this was a disability grant 
queue that people had to stand in and we are asking that people are treated 
with dignity and respect.  
 
This one lady that they interviewed had to leave Bonteheuwel early hours in 
the morning to get to her Athlone office and SASSA is failing our people, 
107 
 
and we are asking for help.  
 
The plea that we are calling is to ask hon Minister Londt to engage with his 
national counterpart and make SASSA work. I thank you.  
 
An HON MEMBER:  And the health, and health…  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, hon members.  
 
An HON MEMBER:  Long queues.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I see the GOOD party.  
 
An HON MEMBER:  The clinics, the hospitals, ai . 
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.] 
Hon Deputy Speaker, no number of extra police …[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:  People are crying [Inaudible.], there are long queues. 
Long hours.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, hon members!  
 
An HON MEMBER:   They are sitting with ….  
 
108 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We are pausing the time, hon member Herron. Hon 
member Windvogel? [Interjections.] You may proceed, hon member Herron.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. No number of 
extra police or security guards will address Cape Town's deeply entrenched 
culture of gangsterism.  
 
The City has announced it will spend R100  million on security to protect 
emergency and service workers in crime ravaged areas and this follows the 
tragic deaths of 10 people in gang -related violence last weekend.  
 
Meanwhile the Provincial Government blames National Government for not 
devolving policing powers, but while some devolution may be necessary, the 
idea that it will magically dissolve gangsterism is misguided.  
 
The Province already pours billions into the City's policing through the 
LEAP programme and the Western Cape Safety Plan, which promised to halve 
the murder rates, but has shown no measurable impact. The truth is more 
police will not fix a problem rooted in inequality and apartheid spatial 
planning.  
 
Cape Town is one of the most unequal cities in the world and it shows. In 
some communities nearly half the residents are unemployed, social services 
are scarce, infrastructure is crumbling and in these conditions gangsterism 
does not just exist, it thrives. A teenager in Newlands acting out may get 
109 
 
help, a teenager in Manenberg gets recruited.  
 
Yes, the Province must ensure safety for frontline workers, but real change 
requires a shift in how we treat working class communities. Imagine if a 
portion of the billions spent on policing were redirected towards social 
development, into mental health support, school -based interventions, 
addiction treatment, job creation and housing. That would do more to disrupt 
gang culture than any increase in law enforcement.  
 
The Western Cape cannot police its way out of this crisis. Real safety comes 
from the investment in people not just boots on the ground. It is time for this 
government to stop chasing headlines and start funding change. Thank you.  
 
An HON  MEMBER:  Stop chasing headlines?  
 
†ŉ AGB LID:   Die waarheid maak seer.  
[An HON MEMBER:  The truth hurts. ] 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I recognise the DA. [Interjections.]  
 
Ms B M VAN MINNEN (DA):   I rise today to express our deepest 
condolences and mourning o f the tragic and senseless killing of Councillor 
Xolile Kalipa, a dedicated servant of the Democratic Alliance and the people 
of Stellenbosch.  
 
110 
 
Councillor Kalipa was fatally shot on the night of 4  May 2025 in Kayamandi 
in what can only be described as an evil act of violence. We are deeply 
shocked and saddened by this loss and we strongly condemn this brutal 
attack.  
 
We join the call for an urgent and thorough investigation by the South 
African Police Service. It is crucial that those responsible for this cowardly 
act are brought to justice swiftly and without compromise. The safety of our 
public representatives and communities cannot be negotiable.  
 
Councillor Kalipa was more than a political figure. He was a humble, 
soft -spoken leader who earned the respect of all who knew him. He served his 
community with unwavering dedication, always listening, always acting, 
always putting people first. His legacy is one of compassion, resilience and 
an unshakeable commitment to bettering the lives of those around him.  
 
To the Kalipa family, his friends, colleagues and the broader Stellenbosch 
community, we extend our heartfelt sympathies. In your grief know that you 
do not mourn alone. We stand with you in determination to ensure justice and 
to continue the work he so passionately pursued. May Councillor Kalipa rest 
in peace and may his memory be a blessing and a call to action for all of us. I 
thank you.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon member Van Minnen.  
 
111 
 
In terms of rule R145(6) I now give one or more members of the Executive 
that is present an opportunity to respond to member statements for not more 
than five minutes collectively. I see hon Minister Londt.  
 
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:   Thank you, hon Deputy 
Speaker. I am going to start with hon member Stoffel and Stephens.  
 
Hon Stephens, you ask for an oversight body. However, that is already there. 
We have regular monitoring and evaluation that happen at all of our facilities 
that we fund. Those reports are available for the Standing Committee as well, 
of which you are a member also, and you can also as a committee go to these 
facilities, as you have done in the past, such as Vermont, which I will get 
back to now.  
 
It is very important that we do not play politics with the lives of the elderly 
in our province. We are one of those provinces where we have an 
ever -increasing older population.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Eastern Cape.  
 
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:   That is then reflected in the 
money and the budget that this Government has allocated.  
 
There was a R14  million increase for the funding to the Older Persons 
Programme and also a R13  million increase in subsidies to support frail older 
112 
 
persons in the old age homes in our province.  
 
It is important that we as lawmakers and those that are exposed to the 
different types of facilities, that we educate communities, but also the boards 
as well because we see where boards function well, but we also see where 
there are failures in the management of the boards.  
 
Now just if you were running a board, you would not want us to interfere in 
the day -to -day running, but we do flag the problems that we pick up through 
our regular monitoring and evaluation, like the committee did when they went 
to Vermont and to the credit of the community in Knysna, they said this is 
not good enough. They got involved, they attended the AGM and they 
actually elected a board that are starting to change around the things in 
Vermont, because if you will remember at the beginning of this term we kept 
raising, kept raising, kept raising Vermont. We have not heard that yet.  
 
So I am going back to Vermont next week to pop in and see how things are 
going.  
 
The same goes for all of these other facilities. [Interjections.] We need to 
make sure that a place like Benevolent Park, [Interjections.] that was in a 
much, much worse situation, there is now an effective management structure 
in place. Let us not get involved with politics. Let us allow them and let us 
support them, hon members Stephens, because that board is turning things 
around.  [Interjections.]  
113 
 
 
The same with the KSE board. We need to make sure that they adhere to their 
own constitution and then the community get involved and turn that around 
the same way they have done so in Vermont. [Interjections.]  
 
So from my side most of the time the committee does an incredible job and I 
thank you for that, but we need to make sure that we take that role of 
education and oversight in a dual role, and we leave the politics aside. 
[Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   It is you! [Interjections.]  
 
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:   To the hon member 
Christians, you are correct to say that SASSA is a national entity and we are 
engaging with the SASSA officials that are at a national level, but we also 
engage with the SASSA leadership within the Western Cape.  
 
Thank goodness they are moving away from the acting positions. They are 
now going to the permanent employment and they have also identified all of 
these points that you have raised and a few more. They have put measures in 
place to alleviate that. It is still not good enough, it is still not acceptable, 
especially with the rainy season coming up, the cold.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Ja!  
 
114 
 
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT:   In the summer you can 
almost be outside, but it is now coming to the difficult part.  
 
So we will continue to raise it. They have committed to improving that and I 
have texted my office and said let us have a follow -up meeting again with 
SASSA and take that up with them as well, but thank you so much.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   I see the ho n member Mackenzie.  
 
†Die MINISTER VAN KULTUURSAKE EN SPORT:   Dankie, agb 
Adjunkspeaker. Ek moet net sê, agb lid, dat natuurlik ons voorganger het 
baklei vir al die tale. Die Demokratiese Party het baklei vir al die tale in 
Suid -Afrika en ek wil net vir die agb lid sê my pa het ook ŉ gedig gehad. My 
pa se gedig was “Moenie lieg nie.” Dankie.  
[The MINISTER OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SPORT:   Thank you, hon 
Deputy Speaker.  I just have to say, hon member, that obviously our 
predecessor fought for all the langua ges.  The Democratic Party fought for all 
the languages in South Africa and I just want to say to the hon member that 
my father also had a poem.  My father’s poem was “Do not lie.” Thank you. ]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I see the hon Minister Baartman.  
 
The MINISTER OF FINANCE:   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon 
member Jacobs made certain reflections upon a member of the NA who also 
happens to be an officer of the court. He is a lawyer, member Michael 
115 
 
Bargain, specifically.  
This is also someone who weekly gives farm labourers free labour advice on 
the radio and approximately 2  000 people tune in to listen to his advice. 
[Interjections.] I have evidence because I was actually invited onto the Disa 
FM radio station [Interjections.] where he asked how does the budget benefit 
farm workers and how can they access some of our agricultural and social 
programmes, which we delved into in this regard, and this is also someone 
who supports NGOs such as those who work with disabled persons, 
[Interjections.] with free guidance and advice.  
 
I know a particular organisation …[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude, hon Minister.  
 
The MINISTER OF FINANCE:   …with making sure that they save jobs 
instead of losing jobs because of national job killing laws and regulations, 
and this is also why we support his work in [Inaudible.] …[Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you, hon Minister Baartman.  
 
The MINISTER OF FINANCE:   …Amendment Act and [Interjections.] 
helping grow our economy. Thank you. [Applause.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon Minister Baartman. Order, hon 
members!  
116 
 
 
That concludes Member Statements. I now recognise the Chief Whip.  
 
MOTIONS WITH NOTICE  
 
The CHIEF WHIP (DA):   Hon Deputy Speaker, I give notice and move the 
motion in my name as it appears on the Order Paper. I so move.  
 
[Notice of Motion as printed on the Order Paper.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon members, are there any objections to the 
motion?  
 
An HON MEMBER:   No.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   No.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   No.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No objections, agreed to.  
 
Hon members, in terms of Rule 151 all Notices of Motion by members are 
required to be delivered to the Secretary for placing it on the Order Paper. 
These motions have been duly submitted and published on the Order Paper 
below the line.  
117 
 
 
Further to Rule 150 I would like to inform hon members that in terms of the 
Standing Rule 150 pertaining to motions without notice, condolences and 
congratulatory were submitted to the Programming Authority prior to the 
plenary on 6 May 2025. Hon members are also reminded that Motions without 
Notice pertaining to congratulatory and condolence will not be allowed in 
this sitting that have not been processed by the Programming Authority.  
 
I have been informed that in the Programming Authority meeting on 6  May 
2025 political parties did submit names of the hon members in the desired 
order of speaking and who had wished to move a motion without notice in 
this sitting of the House.  
 
I will further, just for noting and for the purposes of the minutes, call out the 
hon members whose name have accordingly been submitted and approved. 
The following members’ motion have been approved by the Programming 
Authority as follows.  
 
The hon member D G Jacobs, the hon member W  F Kaizer -Philander, the hon 
member W  F Kaizer -Philander, the hon member W  F Kaizer -Philander, the 
hon member W  F Kaizer -Philander, the hon member B  M van Minnen, hon 
member B  M van Minnen, hon member B  M van Minnen, hon member 
B M van Minnen, hon member B  M van Minnen, hon member D  W Bryant, 
hon member D  Stephens, hon member R  Windvogel, hon member F  Kamfer, 
hon member B  Ngqentsu, hon member A  P Bans, hon member N  D Nkondlo, 
118 
 
hon member M  K Sayed and hon member B  Stoffel.  
 
I now put the motions duly submitted and approved by the Programming 
Authority to the House. Are there any objections?  
 
An HON MEMBER:   No.  
 
An HON MEMBER:   No objections.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is no objections, agreed to. The Motions 
will appear in the Minutes of Proceedings and in Hansard in each individual 
member's name as if the hon member had read them out aloud.  
 
I will now afford opportunity for members to move Motions without Notice 
as per Standing Rule 150(2)(d). This could also include Motions without 
Notice that were not approved by the Programming Authority meeting. Hon 
members are reminded that a 30 minute time allocation is afforded in this 
regard.  
 
I see the hon member Stephens.  
 
MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE  
 
Ms D STEPHENS (PA):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall move without notice:  
119 
 
 
That the House notes that today we rise in recognition of the 
heartbeats of our homes, our communities and our nation – our 
mothers. Mother’s Day is not merely a celebration marked on a 
calendar, it is a reminder of the enduring strength, love and 
resilience that mothers embody each and every day; they are the 
first teachers, the constant nurturers and often the silent warriors 
who carry their families through trials with unwavering 
determination. We honour all mothers from those who cradle 
newborns with ho pe, to those guiding grown children with wisdom; 
we pay tribute to mothers fighting silent battles: those raising 
children entangled in addiction, who continue to love, support and 
pray through pain most will never understand. Your courage and 
devotion are immeasurable; we salute the single mothers who 
embody the roles of both protector and provider, who rise before 
dawn, work tirelessly and still return home with love to give. You 
are not just mothers you are anchors, leaders and everyday heroes. 
Mothers a re the keystones of our communities. They are the 
builders of character, the defenders of dignity and the custodians of 
culture. As the proverb reminds us, “It takes a village to raise a 
child,” but it is mothers who are so often the village themselves; as 
a society we must reflect not only in gratitude, but in action to 
support, protect and empower the women who do so much for all of 
us. Let this Mother’s Day be a call to honour their contribution, to 
listen to their needs and to create a society where eve ry mother 
120 
 
thrives. To all the mothers, we see you, we thank you, we honour 
you. I so move.  
 
[Motion as moved by member.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Are there any objections to the motion being 
moved without notice?  
 
An HON MEMBER:  No.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is no objections, agreed to. I now see the 
hon member B Stoffel.  
 
Ms B N STOFFEL (ANC):   Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall move without notice:  
 
That the House must note that we welcome the announcement by 
the Minister of Finance to stop the proposed increase in Value 
Added Tax which was scheduled to [Interjections.] commence on 
1 May 2025; the initial proposal for an increase to the VAT rate 
was motivated by the urgent need to restore and replenish the 
funding of critical services that have suffered reductions due to the 
country’s constrained fiscal position. I so move.  
 
[Motion as moved by member.]  
121 
 
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon members, are there any objections to the 
motion being moved without notice?  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Objection. [Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is objections. The motion will be printed on 
the Order Paper.  
 
An HON MEMBER:  It is a mess. It is such a mess. [Interjections.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I see the hon member Windvogel.  
 
Ms R WINDVOGEL (ANC):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. On behalf of 
the ANC I move without notice:  
 
That the House expresses its deepest condolences on the passing of 
His Holiness the Pope, a towering spiritual leader and a tireless 
advocate for human dignity; His Holiness leaves behind a profound 
legacy of compassion, justice, and peace. Throughout his papacy he 
reminded us that faith must always be accompanied by action, 
particularly in the service of the vulnerable and the oppressed. His 
unwavering commitment to peace was most evident in his 
courageous political interventions in some of the world's mos t 
troubled regions. He consistently raised his voice against violence 
122 
 
and injustice in Palestine, calling for a just and lasting resolution 
rooted in human rights and mutual recognition. His moral authority 
offered hope to millions and challenged the international 
community to uphold the dignity and aspirations of the Palestinian 
people. I so move.  
 
[Motion as moved by member.]  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are there any objections with the notice being 
moved without notice? No objections, agreed to.  
 
I see the hon member B Stoffel.  
 
Ms B N STOFFEL (ANC):  I move without notice:  
 
That this House welcomes the announcement of an official inquest 
into the suspicious and unresolved deaths of African National 
Congress leaders during the apartheid era, including the tragic 
passing of Chief Albert Luthuli in 1967 and Mlungisi Griffiths 
Mxenge, who was killed in 1981; the apartheid regime was 
responsible for numerous deaths and disappearances of political 
leaders and activists, often disguised as accidents or suicides, while 
evidence increasingly points to calculated assassinations; the 
dec ision to reopen these cases is a significant step toward truth, 
justice and historical accountability, particularly for the families of 
123 
 
the victims who have waited decades for closure. I so move.  
 
[Motion as moved by member.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   [Inaudible.] Vlakplaas.  
 
The DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Are there any objections to the motion being 
moved without notice? [Interjections.] No objections, agreed to. 
[Interjections.]  
 
I see the hon member Benson.  
 
Mr M B NGQENTSU (ANC):  I move without notice:  
 
That this House sends its heartfelt condolences to the family of 
Norman Mbiko and the wider rugby fraternity on the passing of a 
South African rugby legend, who died in the early hours of Tuesday 
age 79; notes that Norman Mbiko was the last captain of the 
African Springboks and a former head coach of the Blitzboks. A 
man who rose through the ranks of a system designed to exclude 
him and who stood tall in the face of apartheid’s cruel segregation 
of sport; further notes that the African Springboks was a team  of 
Black players forced into separate structures, denied access to 
proper facilities, pitches and development under a system that 
sought to silence black excellence; acknowledges that Mbiko, like 
124 
 
many Black South Africans under apartheid, suffered repeated 
forced removals from his land and was eventually relocated to 
Nyanga on the Cape Flats, yet despite the injustice, made history. 
In 2000 he was the first black coach of South Africa’s senior 
national rugby team post -apartheid, leading the Blitzboks to 
international success; recognising that beyond the pitch Mbiko gave 
his life to mentoring and uplifting young players, [Interjections.] 
planting seeds of transformation in communities long forgotten by 
the State and by sport; notes with deep concern that despite the 
passage of 30 years since South Africa’s re -entry into international 
sport, true transformation remains a promise unfulfilled with the 
Springboks failing to meet their own 2023 transformation targets, 
as revealed by SA Rugby’s 2024 internal audit; acknowledges that 
only 13% of players fielded in the 2023 Rugby Championship and 
16% at the World Cup were Blacks; calls on Government to 
accelerate transformation in all sports, with an emphasis on 
developing infrastructure, coaching and high -performance support 
in Black townships and rural areas; honours not only for his 
remarkable contributions on the field, but for his unyielding 
commitment to justice, transformation and the empowerment of 
future generations. I so move. Thank you.  
 
[Motion as moved by member.]  
 
[The Speaker takes the Chair.]  
125 
 
 
The SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon member. Hon members, are there 
any objections to the motion being moved without notice? [Interjections.] No 
objections, agreed to.  
 
I recognise the hon member Ngqentsu.  
 
Mr B N NGQENTSU (ANC):  I move without notice:  
 
That this House conveys its heartfelt condolences to the family of 
Mongi Titi, the minibus taxi industry, the ANC and its alliance 
partners in the Western Cape; notes with deep sadness the cowardly 
assassination of Mongi Titi, aged 45 year old leader in the minibus 
taxi industry, who was gunned down on Wednesday, 16  April 2025, 
while leaving the Nyanga taxi rank to fulfil his church duties; 
recognises Mr  Titi’s significant role in the contribution and 
transformation of public transport in the Western Cape. Having 
risen from the position of security guard to a respected leader 
within the taxi industry, where he championed the legalisation and 
formal integration of taxi sedans/Avanzas, commonly known as 
Amaphela, into mainstream minibus taxi operations between 
Nyanga and Parow/Elsies River; acknowledges his unwavering 
commitment to promoting a taxi industry that is regulated, 
professional and free from the influence of criminal networks; 
expresses concern over the lack of progress in the police 
126 
 
investigation, especially in light of the City of Cape Town’s widely 
publicised surveillance camera infrastructure, which has thus far 
failed to produce any footage to assist in the investigation of this 
heinous crime; calls upon the minibus taxi industry and all relevant 
stakeholders to cooperate fully with law enforcement agencies in 
identifying and bringing to justice those responsible for this brutal 
act; and remembers Titi as a sharp, dedicated and insightful leader 
who will be sorely missed by the minibus taxi industry and all those 
who respected his work and vision for a transformed public 
transport system free from the tentacles of the criminal network. I 
so move. Thank you.  
 
The SPEAKER:   Thank you very much, hon members. Are there any 
objections to the motion being moved without notice?  
 
The MINISTER OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SPORT:  Hon Speaker, c an I 
ask for guidance, please? I think it was raised before, I have raised it before.  
 
A motion of condolences is a condolence. It is not criticising another sphere 
of government, because when you object it looks like you are objecting to the 
motion of condolence, which no one in this world will do, but then you mix it 
up with politics. It just creates confusion. [Interjections.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  Alright. Hon member, I take your – hon Minister, I take 
your point. Hon members, I will come back to the House at the 
127 
 
[Interjections.] next Sitting to give – order! There was a point raised by the 
hon Minister. I will come back and I will provide guidance, but we are in the 
process of this motion being delivered.  
 
So can I ask, do you have an objection to the motion [Interjections.] being 
moved without notice and not to the [Interjections.] – hon members, as part 
of the parliamentary [Interjections.] – hon member Lekker and hon member – 
hon Minister. [Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   You have got no conscience, wena .  
 
The SPEAKER:   Order, hon members! [Interjections.]  
 
An HON MEMBER:   You have got no conscience.  
 
The MINISTER OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SPORT:   Do not 
[Inaudible.] condolence…  
 
An HON MEMBER:   [Inaudible.] and coming and talk nonsense. 
[Interjections.]  
 
The SPEAKER:   Hon members, there is also – order! If you allow me the 
floor while I, when I am on the floor [Interjections.] – order!  
 
An HON MEMBER:   Rubbish.  
128 
 
 
An HON MEMBER:   Nonsense.  
 
The SPEAKER:   Hon members, there is also, part of the parliamentary 
process, there is a process where you can object to the motion, you are 
objecting to the motion being moved without notice and not to the motion 
itself. So if you want to object in that context then, hon Minister, please do 
so.  
 
The MINISTER OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS AND SPORT:   Object 
[Inaudible.] [Interjections.]  
 
The SPEAKER:  There is an objection and the motion will be printed on the 
Order Paper. [Interjections.] Hon members, the motions are part of our 
parliamentary process. [Interjections.] It is a part of our parliamentary 
process and I do not want us to get to a situation where motions are being 
objected and accepted frivolously, because then we might as well take it out 
of our Rules and out of the process, but that motion has now been objected to 
and it will be printed on the Order Paper.  
 
I now recognise the hon member Windvogel. [Interjections.]  
 
†Me R WINDVOGEL (ANC):   Dankie, agb Speaker. [Ms R WINDVOGEL:  
Thank you, hon Speaker. ] Hon Speaker,  on behalf of the ANC, I move 
without notice:  
129 
 
 
That this House welcomes the historic visit of His Excellency, 
President Zelensky, of Ukraine to the Republic of South Africa, 
marking a significant moment in South Africa’s international 
diplomatic engagements. We hope the visit leads to an end to the 
ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine, a war that has cost 
thousands of lives, displaced millions and disrupted global 
stability, including food and energy security in Africa and beyond. 
I so move.  
 
[Motion as moved by member.]  
 
The SPEAKER:   Thank you very much, hon member. Hon members, are there 
any objections to the motion being moved without notice? [Interjections.] No 
objections, agreed to.  
 
The SPEAKER:  I now recognise the hon member Nkondlo. Hon member 
Nkondlo, your opportunity?  
 
Ms N D NKONDLO (ANC):   I am asking the hon …[Interjections.]  
 
The SPEAKER:   No, no, it is your opportunity to move your motion.  
 
Ms N D NKONDLO (ANC):   Oh. [Interjections.]  
 
130 
 
The SPEAKER:  Order, hon members. [Interjections.]  
 
Ms  N D NKONDLO (ANC): Thank you, hon Speaker.  I move without notice:  
 
That the House commemorates May Day, celebrated annually on 1 May, 
as a tribute to the struggles and victories of the working class in South 
Africa; further notes that this day honours the resilience and unity of 
workers who, through the tireless efforts of the ANC –SACP –COSATU 
Alliance, have secured fundamental rights and protections in our 
democracy, acknowledges that among the most notable victories is the 
establishment of a national minimum wage, which affirms the dignity of 
all workers, including domestic workers, farm workers, and other 
vulnerable sectors, ensuring they are no longer excluded from legal 
protection or fair pay; calls on this House, as we celebrate this day, to 
recommit ourselves to defending the rights of workers across all sectors, 
and condemns any efforts to undermine their hard -won gains; let this 
day serve as both a celebration of progress and a call to continue the 
struggle for economic justice and equality for all workers in South 
Africa.  I so move.  Thank you, hon Speaker . 
 
[Motion as moved by Member.]  
 
The  SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon Nkondlo.  Hon members, are there 
any objections to the motion being moved without notice?   
An  HON MEMBER: No.  
131 
 
 
The  SPEAKER: No objections, agreed to.  I recognise the agb Lekker.  
 
†Me P Z LEKKER ( ANC ): Julle kan maar object in advance , nè.  …[Gelag.]  
[Ms P Z LEKKER:  You can maar  object in advance, nè. …[Laughter.] ]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: I object in advance.  …[Laughter.]   
 
The  SPEAKER: Order, hon members.  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Object!  
 
Ms P Z LEKKER ( ANC ): [Laughter.]  I move without notice:  
 
That this House notes that on 27 April 2025, South Africa 
commemorated 31 years of freedom and democracy, marking three 
decades since the historic 1994 elections that ended apartheid and 
ushered in a new constitutional order based on equality, justice and 
human dignity for all; further notes that Freedom Day serves not only as 
a celebration of how far we have come, but as a solemn reminder of how 
much further we still must travel to achieve true liberation for all our 
people; recognises that while we have m ade significant progress in 
building a non -racial democracy, the promise of freedom remains 
unfulfilled for many in the Western Cape, as this province's shameful 
housing backlog of 600  000 units stands as a monument to the DA 
132 
 
Government's failure to prioritise the poor, with their current delivery 
rate of only just over 3  000 BNG houses in the last financial year, 
condemning our people to wait 200 years for decent housing; 
acknowledges that this shocking neglect exposes the DA's empty 
rhetoric about caring for the poor, while their policies continue to 
favour the privileged few; condemns in the strongest terms the DA's 
deliberate slowing of housing delivery and their refusal to work 
cooperatively with National Government to address this crisis; 
appreciates that the DA actions perpetuate apartheid's spatial divisions 
and deny our people their constitutional right to adequate housing; 
further calls on the Western Cape Government to immediately implement 
a credible plan to dramatically increase housing delivery, to release all 
available land for human settlements, and to stop playing politics with 
people's lives; and as we mark 31 years of freedom, calls on this House 
to reaffirm the ANC -led National Government’s commitment to 
inclusive economic growth and transformation that will finally deliver 
the full meaning of liberation where all our people enjoy decent housing, 
quality services, and the dignity promised by our Constitution.  True 
freedom cannot come while hundreds of thousands in our province 
remain trapped in poverty and homelessness by a government that serves 
only the interests of the elite.  I so move, hon Speaker.  
 
[Motion as moved by Member.]  
 
The  SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon member.  Are there any objections 
133 
 
to the motion being moved without notice?   
 
Hon  MEMBERS: Objection.  
 
The  SPEAKER: There is an objection, and the motion will be printed on the 
Order Paper.  I recognise the hon Ngqentsu.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Thank you very much, hon Speaker.  I move 
without notice:  
 
That the House notes with deep concern the urgent court application 
filed by the Mayoral Committee Member Councillor J  P Smith, against 
the South African Police Service and a magistrate of the Western Cape 
High Court; further notes that J  P Smith’s intention to litigate against 
SAPS following the raid on his office is nothing but a textbook response 
from someone born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and a blatant ploy 
to intimidate investigators; further notes that if J  P Smith believes his 
rights were vio lated, he is free to pursue his claim, but he must answer 
to all charges like any … [Interjections.]  ordinary South African, and no 
amount of press statements or legal threats should deter the police’s 
meticulous investigation; further notes that in this application, J  P Smith 
alleges that the search and seizure warrants used during the high -profile 
raid on his office on 24 January 2025 were unlawfully obtained and 
based on falsehoods, errors, and critical omissions; notes further that J  P 
Smith’s legal acti on contains serious accusations of procedural 
134 
 
dishonesty, bad faith, and reputational harm, thereby casting aspersions 
on the integrity and impartiality of SAPS and the judiciary; 
acknowledges that SAPS is constitutionally mandated to investigate 
crime and uphold the law, and must be allowed to perform its duties 
independently, without fear, favour, or political interference; affirms 
that no public representative regardless of political position or status 
should attempt to subvert or intimidate law enforcement agencies 
through litigation or public pressure, especially in matters involving 
allegations of corruption or misconduct; calls on all elected officials, 
especially DA members, to respect the authority … [Interjections.]  of 
independent institutions and to cooperate fully with law enforcement in 
the spirit of transparency and accountability, like any other citizen.  I so 
move.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker takes the Chair.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: We object!  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Object!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the motion being moved 
without notice?  
 
An  HON MEMBER:  We object.  
 
135 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are objections.  The motion will be printed 
on the Order Paper.  Hon members, that concludes Motions without Notice.   
 
A week ago, we had a former hon member of this House, hon member Kama, 
engaged in this particular House.  I think no hon member will also object to 
me welcoming the hon Maseko who served in this particular House for two 
terms.  Welcome.  …[Applause.]  
 
Hon members, we will now deal with the Speaker ’s Debate as printed on the 
Order Paper.  But before we proceed, I recognise the hon Speaker, Daylin 
Mitchell.  
 
SPEAKER’S DEBATE  
 
The  SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.  Hon members, I 
have called this debate in terms of Rule 147 of the Standing Rules.  An 
important date on our parliamentary calendar is 1 May. when we 
commemorate the contributions made by workers in shaping our future and 
recognise the dedication of frontline workers to serve the people of our 
province.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, I now open the floor for discussion of this topic, but it 
would be remiss of me not to use this opportunity to thank all the wonderful 
staff of the Western Cape Provincial Parliament for their dedication and hard 
work and commitment to this institution and to the citizens of the Western 
136 
 
Cape.  Thank you.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Speaker.  I now recognise the hon 
Marais.  
 
The  MINISTER OF POLICE OVERSIGHT AND COMMUNITY SAFETY: Hon 
Deputy Speaker, it is a privilege to participate in this very important debate 
today, on a topic that forms the basis of having a meaningful existence.  
Having a job is not only a way to generate income to support your daily 
needs, but it creates purpose, it promotes interaction with others, it facilitates 
personal development and growth.  It contributes to a healthy society and 
most importantly, it enables a more dignified existence.   
 
It is for this reason that we need to make sure that we, as Government, create 
an environment in which businesses can grow, creating much needed jobs for 
the citizens of our beautiful province.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, Safety plays an integral part in our ability to create a 
conducive environment for businesses to thrive and the creation of jobs.  The 
Western Cape remains one of the provinces most affected by violent crime.  
Poverty and inequality remain root causes creating conditions that foster 
desperation and criminal activity.  In turn, criminal activity has a direct 
impact on the ability of businesses to grow, as it interrupts business 
operations.   
 
137 
 
Another growing concern is extortion which has expanded beyond nightclubs 
and downtown businesses to target small enterprises, public transport 
operators, construction sites and more recently, even our schools.  This 
illegal practice undermines economic activity, threatens livelihoods and 
disrupts essential services.   
 
To combat extortion, a specialised task team has been established by the 
South African Police Service to investigate and dismantle extortion networks.  
The Western Cape Department of Police Oversight and Community Safety is a 
valuable partner to the South African Police Service in this regard.  An 
anonymous extortion hotline has also been established to report incidents of 
extortion.  This coordinated approach has yielded positive results with 
numerous arrests of these alleged extortionists and closing the taps to their 
activities.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the Western Cape Government will be hosting a 
multisectoral summit on the Combatting of Extortion in the Western Cape 
with the aim of developing a comprehensive unified response that leverages 
the collective expertise and resources of Government, law enforcement, the 
private sector and civil society organisations and affected communities.  
 
The problem with extortion requires this unified response as it poses a direct 
threat to the ability of businesses to grow and create jobs.  …[Interjection.]  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Point of order, hon Deputy Speaker.  
138 
 
 
The  MINISTER OF POLICE OVERSIGHT AND COMMUNITY SAFETY: The 
business sector …[Interjection.]  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker?  
 
The  MINISTER OF POLICE OVERSIGHT AND COMMUNITY SAFETY: The 
business sector also has …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, are you able to take your seat.  I see 
the hon Benson.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, I rise on the basis of 
relevance because the content of her statement has nothing to do with the 
commemoration of the International Workers’ Day.  By instance, the issue, 
the crisis of crime of which of course, is a concern to all of us.  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Maybe you are …[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ngqentsu …[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will not dictate, but also, it is a matter of 
interpretation.  I see the Chief Whip.  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon Ngqentsu is rising on 
139 
 
a frivolous point of order and is trying to break the hon Minister ’s flow.  So 
perhaps maybe, what you should suggest to him is that he uses his ears to 
listen to the hon Minister ’s speech until she has concluded.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a point of order.  Let us proceed.  Hon 
Minister, you have five minutes remaining.  
 
The  MINISTER OF POLICE OVERSIGHT AND COMMUNITY SAFETY: 
Thank you.  The problem with extortion requires this unified response as it 
poses a direct threat …[Interjections.] to the ability of businesses to grow 
and create jobs.   
 
The business sector also has a representative serving on a Provincial Safety 
Act Advisory Committee which advises and makes recommendations on how 
to further improve the Western Cape Government’s crime fighting, and 
prevention policies and strategies.  On this platform, we are able to better 
understand the challenges …[Interjections.] faced by businesses and be 
advised on what the best approach is in addressing these challenges.  
[Interjections.]  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the Western Cape Government through the Department 
of Police Oversight and Community Safety, is continuously working towards 
creating a safer society …[Interjections.] in which businesses can operate 
without interruptions caused by violence or the threat of violence.  Our 
initiatives further help to create safer communities so that our workers are 
140 
 
able to travel to and from their places of work.  
 
And example of our investment in creating safer spaces is our LEAP 
programme.  LEAP officers serve as a force multiplier to the South African 
Police Service and engage in visible policing.  Firearm confiscation and 
community engagements contribute to increased safety and stability in 
communities, experienced the highest levels of violent crime.  [Interjections.]  
Hon Deputy Speaker, the increased police visibility created by the presence 
of our LEAP officers in these communities provide our residents with more 
confidence to go about their day without fear or harm.  
 
Community -based safety structures, such as Neighbourhood Watch es and 
Community Policing Forums, also play a crucial role …[Interjections.] in 
crime prevention through mass visibility patrols.  Neighbourhood Watch  
patrollers often sacrifice their sleep to add that extra layer of protection for 
workers travelling to and from their places of work during peak hours.   
 
The Western Cape Government will therefore continue to facilitate the 
establishment of these crucial safety structures, go to accredit and support 
thousand Neighbourhood Watch es by 2030, providing them with training, 
funding and digital tools to enhance their effectiveness.  Community Policing 
Forums, in their turn, create a platform where the business community can 
directly engage with the South African Police Service regarding issues of 
safety affecting their operations in specific policing precincts.  We  will 
therefore continue to support CPFs to be the enabling body for the creation of 
141 
 
safer business environments.   
 
The training provided to Neighbourhood Watch  members and their continuous 
activism in a safety environment creates opportunities for employment.  Our 
Neighbourhood Watch  patrollers often advance through the phases and 
eventually join the law enforcement agencies that they religiously supported 
through their safety activities.  Our LEAP programme supports approximately 
1 000 job opportunities, while enhancing our ability to tackle violent crime.  
Through our Peace Officer training programme, we aim to create at least 240 
employment opportunities annually, as mentioned during my budget speech 
recently. …[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, are you able to take your seat?  I see 
the hon Bans.  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, I think there is seriously a 
mistake because we are debating here today, Workers’ Day.  Maybe there is a 
mistake that happened in the speech.  …[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: No, that is her portfolio.  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): I am just trying to check.  [Interjections.]  Really, 
we have been patient in saying maybe there is something.  Can that quickly 
be rectified?  Thank you.  [Interjections.]  
 
142 
 
The  SPEAKER: Hon members …[Interjections.]  Hon members, before I see 
the Chief Whip.  This is a political debate.  I am not going to adjudicate on 
the content, but we are commemorating Workers’ Day.  I am currently, as a 
Deputy Speaker, working.  The hon Speaker is watching me to see if I am 
able to maintain order.  So, please help me as we commemorate Workers’ Day 
…[Interjections.] and as I am currently sitting here and working.  Are you 
covered?  You are covered?  Are you going to help me to work, hon member 
Benson?  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): No, no, no, thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
[Interjections.]  No, thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  Indeed, in defence of 
the hon MEC, the state of the Police Oversight and Community Safety is 
quite important for the House.  So, I mean, I want to join those who are 
saying hands off to the hon MEC.  Hands off.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much.  Hon member Benson is going 
to help me to work …[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Yes!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: …as I am seated here.  [Interjections.]  I do note 
that you are on the Order Paper as well.  Hon Minister, two minutes and 12 
seconds.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  MINISTER OF POLICE OVERSIGHT AND COMMUNITY SAFETY: 
143 
 
Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  Through our Chrysalis Academy 
Programme, we will continue to provide at -risk youth with life skills, 
occasional training and employment opportunities.  [Interjections.]  
Graduates of the programme are given workplace experiences and 
opportunities through the Expanded Public Works Programme.  
[Interjections.]  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, while doing our best to improve the fibre of our 
communities, it is important to provide these opportunities for growth, 
inspiring hope in our youth to make a meaningful contribution to society and 
be active agents of change.  Our Department will continue to initiate and 
support programmes aimed at making our Province a safer place and 
capacitating our citizens in a process …[Interjections.] to make them more 
employable and to have a more dignified life.  I thank you.  …[Applause.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister.  I see the hon Stoffel.  
 
Ms  B N STOFFEL (ANC): Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  Hon Deputy 
Speaker, hon members of the Western Cape, I greet you.  Today, as we gather 
to commemorate Workers’ Day, we do not merely celebrate a date on this 
calendar.  We honour the blood, sweat and tears of the generation of workers 
who fought for freedom and enjoy today.  We remember the sacrifice of those 
who stood firm against the brutality of apartheid, who organised in secret, 
144 
 
who marched in defiance and who turned the wheels of history towards 
justice.  
 
Before 1994, the workplace was a battlefield for Black workers.  Apartheid 
laws threatened Black labour as cheap, disposable and subhuman.  Black 
workers were banned from skilled jobs, denied union rights and forced into 
back -breaking labour for starvation wages.  Farm workers and domestic 
workers, overwhelmingly Black and female, were excluded from basic 
protection, subjected to abuse and trapped in cycles of poverty.  There was no 
minimum wage, no overtime pay, and no rights to refuse unsafe work.   
 
The apartheid economy was built on the exploitation, but the workers refused 
to be broken.  From the Durban strike of 1973 to the mighty COSATU -led 
stay -aways of the 1980’s, workers organised, resisted and made apartheid 
ungovernable.  They proved that freedom would not come without liberation 
of the working class.   
 
When democracy dawned in 1994 , it actioned in a revolution of workers’ 
rights.  For the first time in our nation’s history, the Constitution guaranteed 
every worker the right to dignity, equality and fair labour practice.  The 
ANC -led Government did not stop at promises.  We translated these 
constitutional rights into real life -changing victories for millions of working 
people across the country.   
 
One of the cornerstones of transformation was the Basic Conditions of 
145 
 
Employment Act.  The Legislation put an end to the 16 -hour shift without 
rest, and outlawed child labour on farms and factories.  For the first time, all 
workers included those previously excluded like farmworkers and domestic 
workers, were guaranteed paid leave, overtime, compensation, regulated 
working hours and protection against unfair dismissals.  This was a direct 
challenge to centuries of abuse under colonialism and apartheid.   
 
The Labour Relations Act further strengthened worker power by legalising 
the right to join trade unions, to strike and to engage in collective bargaining.  
These are rights that apartheid vigorously denied, but which today empower 
millions to negotiate for better wages and working conditions.  Yet, despite 
the progress, the Democratic Alliance, including its hon members in the 
House, have consistently shown discomfort, even hostility towards this 
freedom.  [Interjections.]  Their vision for labour is one that rolls back the 
hard -won rights of the working class.  [Interjections.]  
 
In 2019, we made history again by introducing the National Minimum Wage 
Act, setting a national wage floor for R25,42 per hour.  This was a crucial 
step in our battle against poverty wages, especially for the most vulnerable.  
Domestic workers and farmworkers who for generations were underpaid and 
compensated with food, alcohol, small amounts of cash.  On 1 March 2024, 
this wage was increased to R27,58 per hour, demonstrating our ongoing 
commitment towards improving the lives of workers.  The DA opposed thi s 
too.  The alternative, a society where workers and wages are barely above the 
level of old age grants.  This is the vision for labour in South Africa:  cheap, 
146 
 
exploitable and voiceless.  
 
Lastly, the Employment Act has allowed us to dismantle the racial barriers 
that kept Black professionals out of boardrooms and leadership positions.  We 
now celebrate a new generation of Black CEOs, CFOs, doctors and lawyers 
who are rising because of policies that promote inclusive and fairness.  But 
this law is not just about the boardrooms.  It also protects the most 
vulnerable works from systematic abuse, exploitation and exclusion.  It 
strikes at the heart of the apartheid legacy by insisting on fair representation 
and equal opportunities in every workplace.   
 
Why is the DA in court challenging the Employment Act?  This is the very 
same DA that claims to celebrate Workers’ Day.  Yet, they are actively trying 
to dismantle one of the key laws that protects workers and advances 
workplace transformation.  This is hypocrisy of the highest order.  You 
cannot claim to honour workers while fighting to reverse the gains they have 
made.   
 
Yet, comrades, the struggle is far from over.  Whilst we celebrate the hard -
won victories of our democratic labour laws, we must confront the persistent 
and shameful reality inequality in the workplace.  Women workers continue 
to earn less than men, face daily harassment and are too often left 
unprotected by those in power.   
 
In the Western Cape, female Government employees endure routine abuse at 
147 
 
the hands of senior male officials, yet the Provincial Government remains 
shamefully silent.  Farrell Payne walks free.  Brian Paulse continues to be 
protected.  These are clear examples of a system that shield perpetrators 
instead of defending victims.  Our laws must not only exist on paper.  They 
must be enforced with urgency and integrity to protect the dignity and safety 
…[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon member.  
 
Ms  B N STOFFEL (ANC): In conclusion, hon Deputy Speaker, whilst we 
celebrate Workers’ Day, the DA in the Western Cape continues [Inaudible.] 
our hard -won progress, opposing the minimum wage, challenging employment 
equity and …[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much.  
 
Ms  B N STOFFEL (ANC): In Swellendam, the hospital and the workers in the 
hospital …[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much.  
 
Ms  B N STOFFEL (ANC): Therefore, as the ANC, …[Interjections.] we 
honour this Workers’ Day.  [Interjections.]  It is ours!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon Stoffel.  …[Applause.]  I 
148 
 
did not want to interrupt hon Stoffel from working …[Laughter.]  because we 
are definitely maintaining the decorum of the House.  I now see the hon 
Constable.  …[Interjection.]  
 
Ms  B N STOFFEL (ANC): With the correct speech.  
 
Mr N CONSTABLE (PA):  Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members of this Parliament 
and fellow South Africans.  We stand today under the banner of Workers’ 
Day, 1 May, rooted in resistance, dignity and the struggle of justice.  The 
origin of this international commemoration dates back to 1886 in Chicago, 
when workers gave their lives demanding the eight -hour working day.  In 
South Africa, Workers’ Day was adopted post -apartheid to honour those who 
fought not just for the labour rights, but for the future of equity and 
inclusion.   
 
But today, I ask this House and this country:  is Workers’ Day still relevant to 
Coloured people in the Western Cape?  [Interjections.]  How can we ask 
people to celebrate a day dedicated to employment rights when the life reality 
is chronic unemployment and systemic exclusion, when the so -called 
victories of democracy have not translated into access to dignity and 
opportunities for Coloured workers?   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, let us confront the brutal truth.  Employment equity in 
South Africa has become the most effective modern instrument of exclusion 
for Coloured people, especially in the Western Cape where they are the 
149 
 
largest demography.   
 
The Commission for the Employment Equity 2023 Report shows that 
Coloured people make up 48,8% of the economic activity population in the 
Western Cape yet, are still grossly under -represented at all levels of 
employment.  Particularly in top management there are only 11,6% and senior 
management only 14,2%.  This is not by accident.  It is a result of deliberate 
application of national demographics in provincial context sidelining the 
Coloured population in their own backyard.  And who is responsible?  
Provincial, as well as National Government.   
 
So, I ask again, what is the relevance of Workers’ Day for a Coloured child 
from Bonteheuwel and in Bishop Lavis, in Steenberg, in Hanover Park  and 
specifically, in the Central Karoo who wake up daily to no jobs, no hope and 
no future  What is there to celebrate when the Coloured youth experience 365 
days of unemployment, 365 days of rejection, 365 days of being told they do 
not count?  The irony is bitter.   
 
When it is time for elections, all the political parties show up in our 
communities demanding the votes from our people they refuse to hire, train 
or develop.  They want our vote, but not our participation.  They want our 
compliance, but not our contribution.  For Workers’ Day to regain a 
meaningful Coloured …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon member.  
150 
 
 
Mr N CONSTABLE (PA):  Let me conclude.  We, as the Patriotic Alliance, make 
it clear that no transformation can take place if it excludes the communities 
of Coloured people in the Western Cape.  Thank you.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon Constable.  I recognise the 
hon Cassiem.  
 
Ms  A CASSIEM (EFF): Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  Hon Deputy 
Speaker, Workers’ Day stems from a struggle to develop and maintain 
workers’ rights in the fight against social injustice and exclusion.  It has its 
roots as a struggle by the working class or as the social class revolting 
against an unjust system at the hands of those who own the means of 
production.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the struggle might have started sometime back in the 
1800’s around the world, but it still continues in modern day South Africa 
due to the constant struggles workers face against this Government, as well 
as within the private sector.  Our people get retrenched on a daily basis in 
situations where such a move could have been avoided, as we have seen in 
this province where teachers’ posts were cut only because those in power do 
not want to pay salaries of those much -needed teachers.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the EFF has over the years, been calling for the 
insourcing of workers rendering services to the public institutions, including, 
151 
 
but not limited to nurses, porters, cleaners and general workers among others.  
But all these calls have been falling on deaf ears.  Most of these workers 
provide services to these Government institutions directly, whilst employed 
by agencies who offer them below minimum wage as some workers are even 
forced to pay money upfront in order to get a job.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, in 2022, as the EFF, we yielded to call where hospital 
service assistants’ contracts were being unjustly terminated at Groote Schuur 
Hospital at the hands of this Provincial Government.  It was this DA 
Government that made sure that these workers not only lose their jobs but get 
arrested on the day as well.  
 
Farm workers remain without rights in this province, more especially at the 
hands of abusive White farmers.  Hon Deputy Speaker, the plight of 
farmworkers in this province means they receive little wages or small wages, 
and some are even remunerated in the form of wine on these farms.  Hon 
Deputy Speaker, the majority of farmworkers do not even know their rights, 
and this is the reason why White farmers take advantage of them across the 
province.  These farmworkers are constantly evicted from these farms as well 
for minor mistakes and left without anywhere else to go as some lived most 
of their lives on these farms and were even born on these farms.  
 
In conclusion, hon Deputy Speaker, it is quite ironic that this debate is 
sponsored by someone from the DA, coming from a party which has no regard 
for workers’ rights in this province, especially Black and Coloured workers.  
152 
 
Thank you very much.  [Interjections.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Ah!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Cassiem.  I see th e hon Kaizer -
Philander.  
 
†Me W F KAIZER -PHILANDER ( DA ): Baie dankie, agb Adjunkspeaker.  Ek 
staan vandag op met diepe respek en ŉ opregte huldeblyk aan diegene wat 
noodsaaklike dienste lewer, veral die toegewyde werkers in maatskaplike 
ontwikkeling, gesondheidsorg en onderwys.  Vandag in hierdie Huis staan ons 
stil om hulde te bring aan die ware ruggraat van ons samelewing.  Die mans 
en vroue wie se onvermoeide pogings dalk nie opslae maak nie, maar wat 
daagliks lewens verander.  
 
Agb Adjunkspeaker, aan die voorpunt van ons maatskaplike dienste, staan ons 
maatskaplike diens -werkers.  Hulle is dikwels die eerste om te reageer op die 
krisisse waarmee te veel gesinne gekonfronteer word.  Armoede, 
huishoudelike geweld, dwelmmisbruik en gesinsverbrokkeling, maar hulle is 
nie net administrateurs nie.   
 
Hulle is gemeenskapbouers, beskermers van die kwesbare en lewenslyne vir 
diegene op die rand.  Hulle keer dat kinders deur die krake val.  Hulle help 
vroue om uit die kringloop van mishandeling te ontsnap.  Hulle ond ersteun 
bejaardes om met waardigheid te leef en tog, ontstellend genoeg word hierdie 
153 
 
werkers toenemend aan geweld onderwerp, spesifiek verval, fisies en in 
tragiese gevalle, dodelik terwyl hulle eenvoudig hulle pligte probeer uitvoer.  
 
Wanneer ŉ maatskaplike werker aangeval word, is dit nie net ŉ individu wat 
seergemaak word nie.  Dit is ŉ gesin wat sonder ondersteuning gelaat word, ŉ 
gemeenskap wat blootgestel word en die gevolg is uiterste uitbranding en 
bedankings wat ŉ gevaarlike illusie van die stelsel  kan veroorsaak wat 
ontwerp is om ons kwesbaarste te beskerm.   
 
Daarom, agb Adjunkspeaker, is dit belangrik om maatskaplike werkers as 
noodsaaklike diensverskaffers te klassifiseer om die goeie werk wat hulle tot 
hierdie sektor bring, te beskerm.  Agb Adjunkspeaker, gesondheid en welsyn 
is nie luukshede nie.  Dit is fundamentele menseregte en hierdie regte word 
daagliks bevestig deur ons verpleegkundiges, ons dokters, terapeute, en 
gemeenskap -gesondheidswerkers.  Hulle is die hoeksteen van welsyn in ons 
samelewing.  Hulle bied nie net behandeling aan nie, maar ook troos, 
stabiliteit en vertroue in gemeenskappe waar dit dikwels ontbreek.   
 
Geïntegreerde gesondheidsorg waar maatskaplike dienste en 
geestesgesondheid -ondersteuning deel is van hierdie ekosisteem.  Dit is nie ŉ 
droom nie.  Dit is ŉ noodsaaklikheid.  Wanneer ons mense holisties behandel, 
doen ons meer as om simptome te bestuur, ons skep ware.  Gesondheidsorg is 
nie net ŉ middel tot genesing nie, maar ook tot ontwikkeling en waardigheid.   
 
Agb Adjunkspeaker, onderwys bly die grondslag van volhoubare sosio -
154 
 
ekonomiese vooruitgang.  Ons onderwysers is meer as net opvoeders.  Hulle 
is mentors, rolmodelle, beskermers en dikwels die enigste konstante 
volwassene in ŉ kind se lewe.  Veral in onderbefondsde skole dra hulle ŉ 
ondenkbare las, maar daag hulle steeds op dag na dag met onwrikbare 
toewyding.  Maar laat ons duidelik wees.  Hierdie onderwysers werk in vol 
klaskamers met beperkte materiaal en met min ondersteuning vir leerlinge se 
geestelike en emosionele behoeftes .   
 
En ja, agb Adjunkspeaker, daar is dié wat probeer om veral die Wes -Kaap 
Regering te beskuldig daarvan dat ons geld uit die onderwysstelsel neem.  
Laat ek dit duidelik stel.  Dit is bloot nie waar nie.  Moeilike besluite moes 
geneem word as gevolg van die wanbestuur en korrupsie van ŉ mislukte 
ANC -regering.  Tussen 2014 en 2019, het Suid -Afrika sowat R1,5 triljoen 
verloor aan korrupsie en wanadministrasie wat moontlik gemaak word deur 
dieselfde mense wat ŉ eed afgelê het om hierdie land te dien.  Maar eerder, 
het hulle saamgesweer om hierdie land te beroof.  En nou word daar van ons 
verwag om verantwoording te doen vir die finansiële gemors wat hulle geskep 
het.  
 
Aan die agb kollegas aan die ander kant van die vloer sê ek:  voordat julle 
vra of praat van geld, vra eerder eers vir julle kollegas op nasionale vlak om 
die geld terug te betaal. [Tussenwerpsel.]  
[Ms W F KAIZER -PHILANDER (DA): Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
Today I rise with deep respect and a sincere tribute to those delivering 
essential services, especially the dedicated workers in social development, 
155 
 
health care and education.  Today in this House we stand to honour the true 
spine of our society.  Than men and women whose unrelenting efforts do not 
make waves, but who would change lives daily.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, at the forefront of our social services stand our social 
workers.  They are often the first to react to crises with which too many 
families are confronted.  Poverty, domestic violence, drug abuse and family 
disintegration, but they are not only administrators.   
 
They are community builders, protectors of the vulnerable and life direction 
for those on the edge.  They prevent that children fall through the cracks.  
They help women to escape from the cycle of abuse.  They support the aged 
to live with dignity and yet, disturbingly enough these workers are exposed 
increasingly to violence, specifically disintegration, physically and in tragic 
cases, deadly while they are simply  trying to do their tasks.   
 
When a social worker is attacked, it is not only the individual that is hurt.  It 
is a family left without support, a community exposed and the result is the 
extreme exhaustion and resignations that can cause a dangerous illusion of 
the system that was designed to protect our most vulnerable.   
 
Therefore, hon Deputy Speaker, it is an important to classify social workers 
as essential service providers to protect the good work that they bring to this 
sector.  Hon Deputy Speaker, health and wellness are not luxuries.  It is 
fundamental human rights and these rights are daily confirmed by our nursing 
156 
 
professionals, our doctors, therapists and community health workers.  They 
are the cornerstone of wellness in our society.  They not only offer treatment, 
but also consolation, stability and trust in communities where it is often  
lacking.   
 
Integrated healthcare where social services and mental health support are part 
of this ecosystem.  It is not a dream.  It is a necessity.  When we treat people 
holistically, we do more than just manage symptoms, we create real well 
being. Healthcare is not just a means to recovery but also to development and 
dignity.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, education remains the basis of sustainable socio -
economic progress.  Our are more than just educators.  They are mentors, role 
models, protectors and often the only constant adult in a child’s life.  
Especially in underfunded schools they carry an unbelievable burden, but 
they still show up day after day with firm commitment.  But let us be clear.  
These teachers work in full classrooms with limited materiaal and with little 
support for learners’ spiritual and emotional needs.     
 
And yes, hon Deputy Speaker, there are those who try to accuse especially 
the Western Cape Government, of taking money from the education system.  
Let me state it clearly.  It is simply untrue.  Difficult decisions had to be 
taken as a result of mismanagement and corruption of a failed ANC 
government.  Between 2014 and 2019, South Africa has lost about sowat R1,5 
trillion to corruption and maladministration that are made possible by the 
157 
 
same people would took an oath to serve this country.  But rather, they 
conspired to rob this country.  And now we are expected to account for the 
financial mess that they have created.   
 
To the hon colleagues on the other side of the floor I say:  before you ask all 
talk about money, rather ask your colleagues at national level first to pay 
back the money.  [Interjection.] ] 
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
†Me W F KAIZER -PHILANDER ( DA ): Geagte Adjunkspeaker, die pad vorentoe 
moet waardig en samewerkend wees.  Maatskaplike ontwikkeling, gesondheid 
en onderwys kan nie in silo’s funksioneer nie.  Hulle moet saamwerk, hand 
aan hand, om gemeenskappe op te hef en ons nasie te herbou.  Aan elke 
maatskaplike werker, elke onderwyser, verpleegkundige en versorger, julle 
werk is nie net waardevol nie.  Dit is van kardinale belang.  Julle is die 
bewaarders van waardigheid, die beskermers van moontlikheid en die 
argitekte van ŉ beter more.  Ons dank julle nie net vir wat julle doen nie, 
maar vir wie julle is.  Ek dank u, agb Adjunkspeaker. …[Applous.]   
[Ms W F KAIZER -PHILANDER (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the road ahead 
must be dignified and cooperative.  Social development, healt h and education 
cannot function in silos.  They must work together, hand in hand, to uplift 
communities and rebuild our nation.  To every social worker, every teacher, 
nursing professional and carer, you work is not only valuable.  It is of 
cardinal importance.  You are the protectors of dignity, the protectors of 
158 
 
possibility and architects of a better tomorrow.  We not only thank you for 
what you do, but for who you are.  I thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
…[Applause.] ] 
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Kaizer -Philander.  I see the hon 
Jacobs.  
 
Mr D G JACOBS (NCC) : Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker .  [Speaking in 
vernacular – 3:17:57]  Hon Deputy Speaker, on 1 May we celeb rate May Day, 
a day we commemorate the victories claimed by workers and unions around 
the globe.  Now, hon Deputy Speaker, in South Africa, we think of issues that 
were addressed and one such as the eight -hour work shift, minimum wage, 
workplace safety, paid leave and anti -discrimination laws.   
 
But, hon Deputy Speaker, if we must critically look at the workplace, we will 
find ourselves making a mockery of the blood of those who died to cement 
these gains for us in the workplace.  We must admit, we are losing the battle.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, capitalism, the disregard for labour practices and 
discrimination are alive.  The daily news agencies will tell us yet another 
violent protest, mass retrenchment and the casualisation of the workplace.  
†Ons praat nou van een maand, twee, drie, vier, vyf maande kontrakkies.  
[We are now speaking of one month, two, three, four, five months’ little 
159 
 
contracts. ] 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker , May Day has become just another public holiday and, 
in some cases, a long weekend.  Meanwhile, we forget the pain and suffering 
that moved this Government to honour the fight of the working class.  Hon 
Deputy Speaker, in our province, we see farmworkers being illegally evicted, 
call centre staff being abused mentally, physically, workers are being 
dismissed unfairly, and many Coloured workers are being replaced.  Race -
based!  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, how can we celebrate Workers’ Day in the Coloured 
community when 80% of our community is unemployed.  Now, there is a 
saying that goes:  we have no right to believe that freedom can be won 
without the struggle.  Never!  The Coloured struggle is real.  Apartheid -style 
housing, unemployment, gang violence, crime, and the inability of the 
Western Cape Government to stop the uncontrolled entry of illegal foreign 
businesses and illegal informal settlements.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, let me remind this House that we will never, ever forget 
why May Day was announced.  Amase.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Jacobs.  I recognise the hon 
Marais.  
 
Mr  G P MARAIS (FFP): Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  Hon Deputy 
160 
 
Speaker, Workers’ Day no longer holds the meaning in South Africa because 
so many thousands are unemployed.  Today, despite the plethora of 
legislation protecting the rights of workers, we have one of the highest 
unemployment rates in the world.  For the past 30 years, we have had a 
National Government more obsessed with racial quotas, now called ‘targets’, 
rather than focusing on achieving higher levels of employment, especially 
among our youth.  
 
Economic growth will potentially solve our employment equity crisis and 
inequality crisis.  Employment equity laws will not solve our economic crisis 
and labour unions continue demanding unreasonable wage increases but do 
very little to improve workers’ productivity.   
 
The Freedom Front Plus calls for a new approach and realigned economic 
policies that will allow for conditions conducive to higher levels of 
investments underpinned by business confidence.  Reduce business tax to 
allow them to expand and create more job opportunities.  Hon Deputy 
Speaker, we need to support entrepreneurs.  Workers’ Day should be 
Entrepreneurs’ Day because that should be the focus going forward.  They 
create the jobs.   
 
In conclusion, Workers’ Day is a sad day.  There is nothing to celebrate 
because men and women are rather forced to subject themselves to generate 
income illegally because there is no other way and that must be solved by 
this Government.  I thank you.  
161 
 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Marais.  I see the hon Brinkhuis.  
 
Mr  G BRINKHUIS (AL JAMA -AH): Thank you very much, hon Deputy 
Speaker.  Hon Deputy Speaker, today Al Jama -ah rises in honour of the 
workers, the men and women whose hands built this country and whose 
struggles continue to shape its future.  Workers’ Day is not just a calendar 
event.  It is a political statement.  A remembrance of the past and a rallying 
call for justice in the present.   
 
Our movement recognises the role of workers not just as economic 
participants, but as vanguards in the liberation struggle.  From the mines to 
the factories, from farms to public offices, it was the organised strength of 
workers that helped crack the spine of apartheid.  Yet, the painful truth is 
economic liberation still eludes the majority.  Workers face precarious jobs, 
exploitation contracts and a system that rewards capital, while disregarding 
human dignity.   
 
Today, unemployment remains a crisis, particularly among the youth.  Trade 
union membership is declining with over 70% of workers outside of 
organised labour.  Victimisation of unionised workers persists, while union 
leadership is at times consumed by internal divisions.  We say today:  enough 
is enough.  We must revitalise the labour movement as a force for dignity and 
justice.  We demand that the Provincial Legislator protects the right to 
organise and to act decisively against employers who undermine it.   I thank 
162 
 
you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
The  SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Brinkhuis.  I see the hon Masipa.  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, today we commemorate 
Workers’ Day following an inciteful engagement at the G20 Global 
Parliamentary Network where hon members of this Parliament and from 
around the world, deliberated on the critical need to invest in women’s 
health.  
 
I wish to thank my hon colleagues here in this House for their commitment 
and valuable contributions to this important dialogue.  It is through such 
discussions that we begin to create a healthier women workforce.  On behalf 
of the Democratic Alliance in the Western Cape, I express our deepest 
appreciation to all workers across the province.  Thank you for choosing the 
path of dignity, resilience and economic contribution, rather than the road of 
destruction and despair.   
 
This message is shared against the backdrop of a national unemployment 
crisis.  Yet here in the Western Cape, we continue to demonstrate that what is 
possible when Government workers and the private sector partner for 
progress.  
 
Workers, your decision to partner with the Western Cape Government, private 
sector and civil society is not just an act of personal responsibility.  It is an 
163 
 
act of patriotism.  You have rejected the populous rhetoric of union bosses 
who call for shutdowns and economic sabotage.  You have refused to allow 
your future to be defined by outdated ideologies rooted in failed Marxist 
dogma.  To the affiliates of NEHAWU, COSATU, ANC and PA, Government 
and business are not your enemies.  They are your partners in development.  
Together, we must build and not burn.   
 
Let us learn from history as noted by American historian Lee Edwards when 
Mikhail Gorbachev took power in the Soviet Union in 1985, he inherited a 
crumbling empire.  After 70 years of Marxism, the farms could not feed the 
people, the factories could not meet basic quotas and citizens stood in bread 
lines …[Interjections.] while their soldiers returned from Afghanistan in body 
bags.  This is the legacy of Marxism:  poverty, hunger, failure and despair.  
[Interjections.]  
 
We do not need to look as far as Russia.  Closer to home, ANC -run 
Johannesburg, Germiston, Vereeniging, East London, Gqeberha, 
…[Interjections.]  once proud cities have been reduced to rubble under ANC 
misrule, cheered on by their ideological partners … [Interjections.]  in 
COSATU and SACP.  These ANC municipalities are on the brink of collapse 
…[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): …and when they fall, the Democratic Alliance will be 
164 
 
called upon to clean up …[Interjections.] yet, another disaster left behind by 
ideological obsession and policy neglect.  By contrast, in the Western Cape, 
workers are …[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members.  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): …the heartbeat of an economy that works.   
 
We see it in Cape Town’s worldclass infrastructure.  We see it in our efficient 
road networks, in the booming tourism sector and in the rising investor 
confidence that brings conferences, global events and economic opportunities 
to our doorstep.  Cape Town has once again been named ‘Africa’s leading 
City destination’ and it is because of the workers who get up every day and 
do their part to make our province work.   
 
And that is why we honour them today.  We, in the Democratic Alliance, 
believe in empowering our workers.  Not pacifying them with false promises.  
That is why the Western Cape Government continues to priorities policies 
that attract investment, reduce red tape and expand access to job 
opportunities, especially for young people.  [Interjections.]  We also extend 
our gratitude to unions and workers organisations that understand the 
difference between protecting workers’ rights and sabotaging economic 
recovery.  We thank those who chose dialogue over destruction and 
pragmatism over populism.   
 
165 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, when over 43% of our youth are unemployed, it is not 
just an economic crisis.  It is a moral failure, and that failure lies squarely at 
the feet of the ANC Government whose inflexible labour laws and race -based 
regulatory frameworks have made it even harder to grow the economy.  They 
have made it even harder for hope.   
 
While the DA remains firmly committed to transformation, we reject the 
notion that we must shrink the pie in order to share it.  Real empowerment 
comes from growing the economy.  Not choking it with quotas and BEE 
regulation, cadre deployment and union interference.  [Interjections.]  We 
believe that dignity comes from work, not welfare.  It comes from enterprise, 
not entitlement. …[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Yes!  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): It comes from opportunity, not ideology, 
…[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): …hon members.  To the workers of the Western Cape, 
we just want to say, ‘thank you’.  Thank you for standing with us.  Thank you 
for keeping the lights on.  Thank you for the roads that are open that we can 
drive without potholes.  …[Interjection.]  
 
166 
 
An  HON MEMBER: Ja.  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): Thank you for the economy that is growing.  Thank 
you that are hopes are alive.  [Interjections.]  Thank you, hon Deputy 
Speaker.  …[Applause.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Masipa.  I see the hon Christians.  
[Interjections.]  Order, hon members.  [Interjections.]  
 
Mr  F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP): Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  As the 
ACDP we recognise the dedication and contributions of all our workers.  Hon 
Deputy Speaker, we want to honour and celebrate those workers 
…[Interjections.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Your turn …[Interjections.]  
 
Mr  F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP): …who rise up early in the morning 
…[Interjections.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Let us listen to …[Interjections.]  
 
Mr  F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP): …and arrive at home when it is dark.  
[Interjections.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: …is speaking.  
167 
 
 
Mr  F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP): We honour those hardworking men and 
women …[Interjections.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: …is speaking.  
 
Mr  F C CHRISTIANS (ACDP): …who want to make sure that their children 
complete their education, that their children graduate to make sure that they 
end the curse of poverty.  Hon Deputy Speaker, we have a long way to go to 
ensure that the Government creates an environment for economic growth.  
[Interjections.]   
 
Too many of our young people who matriculated, too many of our young 
people who graduated are still sitting at home.  Too many of our fathers and 
mothers cannot provide for their families because they cannot find 
employment.  Hon Deputy Speaker, as the ACDP, we want to salute the 
hardworking frontline workers who are sacrificing their lives, who are 
sacrificing their family time so that we can enjoy these services.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, Workers’ Day is a celebration for those who work hard 
to make sure that we live in safety.  I thank you.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Christians.  I see the hon Herron.  
Before hon Herron, I see the hon Sayed.  
 
168 
 
The  LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Hon Deputy Speaker, just a 
point of curiosity, hon Deputy Speaker.  For the second Sitting in the row 
now, the hon Dr Meyer is not in the House.  I am quite concerned.  
…[Laughter.]   It is rather unlike him not to be in the House.  [Interjections.]  
Thank you.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members …[Interjections.]  Hon members, we 
are nearing the end of our Sitting.  I see the hon Herron.  [Interjections.]  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  Hon Deputy 
Speaker, before we begin, we should pause to acknowledge the deep irony of 
having this debate here in the Western Cape, a province where the political 
leadership is actively campaigning against progressive changes to 
employment equity laws.  To honour the sacrifices of workers while 
simultaneously fighting to entrench historical work privilege is not just 
contradictory, it is outrageous.  [Interjections.]  
 
Workers’ Day represents the profound sacrifices made by those who fought 
tirelessly for the rights we now hold dear.  Workers’ Day is rooted in the 
struggles against apartheid -era labour exploitation where workers demanded 
fair wages, safe working conditions and the right to unionise.  However, 
while we honour these historic victories, we must confront the pressing 
challenges that persist.   
 
Nationally, South Africa grapples with a staggering unemployment rate with 
169 
 
over 40% of our population unemployed.  In the Western Cape, although the 
official unemployment rate stands at 19,6%, this figure still represents a 
significant portion of our population.  Moreover, job creation efforts have 
predominantly been concentrated in major urban areas, particularly Cape 
Town which accounts for approximately 73% of the province’s GDP.  
 
This urban centric development has marginalised our rural communities.  For 
instance, regions like the Central Karoo face unemployment rates of as high 
as 25,6%, highlighting the stark disparities within our province.  Young 
people in rural towns, small towns and farming communities are being left 
behind, often forced to migrate or face a future without an opportunity.  
 
The dignity of work is not a privilege; it is a right.  If we are to truly honour 
the legacy of Workers’ Day, we must renew our fight for that right.  We must 
strive for inclusive economic policies that address these regional disparities 
ensuring that every worker, regardless of their postal code, has access to 
dignified employment opportunities.  The Western Cape Government must 
step up.  Workers’ Day must be more than a commemoration.  It must be a 
commitment to action.  …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.  
 
Mr B N HERRON (GOOD):  Thank you.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon Herron.  [Interjections.]  I 
170 
 
see the hon Benson Ngqentsu.  [Interjections.]  Hon Benson, the podium will 
be brought to you now.  Yes.  A man of the people.  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Ja.  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Yes!  
 
An  HON MEMBER: Amen!  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, you may proceed.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.  
Thank you very much, former Deputy Provincial Chairperson of poor in the 
province, Beauty Stoffel, for opening the reality bid.   
 
On behalf of our movement, it is both a privilege and a profound honour to 
represent the workers of this province in today’s debate commemorating 
International Workers’ Day.  The debate is sponsored at a time when right 
winged forces and representatives of capitalism  are on the offensive, 
attaching the workers of this country.  
 
I must express my deep concern in sharing this platform with political parties 
and the remnants of apartheid whose hands are stained with the exploitation 
of workers.  Maybe that is why the hon MEC for Police could not be able to 
focus on the core issue on the basis that workers in this province, in 
171 
 
particular in the City of Cape Town, were facing dismissal under her own 
word.  [Interjections.]  And also, maybe that is why the apartheid apologist, 
Masipa, launches an attack on Marxism and distorting and lying about 
failures and failed to apply the successes of capitalism.   
 
I do not mince my words when I say, many of these very same individuals 
and political parties have no moral authority to commemorate this day.  They 
have consistently opposed the policies of fundamental transformation aimed 
at redressing centuries of national oppression and capitalist exploitation.   
 
To exemplify, on Tuesday, 6 May 2025, those who either benefited directly 
from racial exclusion …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ngqentsu, are you able to take your seat?  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): …or were complicit in sustaining the legacy 
…[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Benson, there is a point of order.  I see the 
hon Walters.  
 
Mr  T C R WALTERS (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, hon member Masipa was 
referred to as an apartheid apologist, …[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: So?  
172 
 
 
Mr  T C R WALTERS (DA): …which I do not believe is parliamentary.  
[Interjections.]  In fact, it is utterly untrue, in fact is part of the pro -poor 
party in this House.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I will consult Hansard in that regard 
…[Interjections.] and return to the House if need be.  Hon Benson, please 
continue.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): On Tuesday, 6 May 2025, those who either 
benefited directly from racial exclusion …[Interjections.] or were complicit 
in sustaining the legacy of colonialism …[Indistinct.]  and apartheid 
approached the High Court to challenge the Employment Equity Amendment 
Act. …[Interjection.]  
 
An  HON MEMBER: And they lost it.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Yes, even Masipa himself, he is in the DA and a 
beneficiary of affirmative action.  …[Applause.]  It is no secret that those 
opposed to policies …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members!  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): …of fundamental transformation are led by the 
DA …[Interjection.]  
173 
 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ngqentsu, are you able to take your seat?  I 
see the hon Masipa.  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon speaker on the floor 
referred to me directly.  He must speak through you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Masipa.  Hon Benson, please speak 
through the Chair.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): It is no secret that those opposed to policies of 
fundamental transformation, including apologists such as hon Masipa, are 
from the DA, the Freedom Front Plus and their Afri -Forum.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, when we speak of policies of fundamental 
transformation in South Africa’s labour market, and policies we today 
celebrate, we refer to the progressive legal frameworks and reforms that have 
reshaped the labour dispensation in our country and they include key amongst 
others:  the Employment Equity Act.  Here, in South Africa, whilst Whites 
constitute a mere 8%, they are 68% in top positions and that must come to an 
end, and employment equity seeks to address that question.  
 
These labour frameworks include labour relations, basic conditions of 
employment, national minimum wage, including the right to collective 
174 
 
bargaining and joining a union.  These are not just laws and rights, they are 
the embodiment of hard -won victories by workers and their representatives.  
Yet, we now face a resurgence of right -wing forces, particularly the DA, who 
represent the interests of capitalists.  
 
In this context, as we commemorate the International Workers’ Day and given 
how representatives of capitalist market forces are emboldened here at home, 
we call on all workers across this province and the economy of these sectors 
of our economy, Black and White, to isolate these elements.  We must resist 
the rollback of our hard -earned rights by those who serve corporate and 
capitalist interests.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, despite the current right -wing capitalist offensive on 
the workers, International Workers’ Day is rooted in the global history of 
worker resistance and sacrifice.  We remember the Australian workers of 
1856 who demanded the end to the 18 -hour workday.  We honour the over 
350  000 American workers who took to the streets on 1 May 1886, demanding 
8 hours for work, 8 hours for rest, and 8 hours for what we will.  
 
In South Africa, we celebrate the courage of White workers who gathered in 
Market Square in 1904, the railway workers of Cape Town in 1906, and those 
in Durban in 1909 all of whom stood up against exploitation.  
 
We pay tribute to the International Socialist League, the forerunner of the 
Communist Party …[Interjection.]   
175 
 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ngqentsu.  I see there is a point of order.  I 
see the hon Minister.  
 
The  MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: I do want to commend him 
because they are really honouring the eight -eight -eight principle by only 
getting eight members elected to Parliament.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, that is not a point of order.  Hon 
members, we are drawing to the end.  I will not entertain any further points 
of orders in this regard.  [Interjections.]  I will not entertain any points of 
order further in this regard and I will caution hon members that frivolous 
points of orders that are raised should ultimately be kept to yourself.  So, hon 
member Benson, you may proceed.  [Interjections.]  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): We honour the resolution passed by the ANC, 
the SACP, …[Interjection.]  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA):  Point of order, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): …and the South African Indian Congress in 
1950 to organise mass action in Orlando West …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ngqentsu?  
 
176 
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): …against pass laws and discriminatory 
legislation …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member Ngqentsu, please take your seat.   
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA):  Hon Deputy Speaker, you recognised my hand.  Can 
I?  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of order?  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA):  I want to ask the hon member if he is prepared to take 
a question.  Is the hon member prepared to take a question?  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you prepared to take a question, hon member 
Ngqentsu?  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): No.  No!  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): We remember with pride …[Interjection.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): … OR Tambo, who on May Day 1985, called on 
177 
 
workers to render the country ungovernable as part of the broader liberation 
struggle.  
 
Over the years, May Day has come to symbolise the struggles waged by South 
African workers under the leadership of SACTU, FOSATU, COSATU, the 
SACP, and the ANC struggles against the two interrelated contradictions, the 
national oppression as a dominant contradiction on the one hand, and 
capitalist exploitation as a fundamental contradiction on the other hand.  
 
Finally, let us not allow the sacrifices of our forebears to be reversed.  Let us 
stand firm, united, and vigilant in defence of our rights.  Let us honour the 
past by fighting for the future.  In recognition of the sacrifices of the trade 
union movement, both locally and internationally, we will not succumb to the 
right -wing agenda bent to challenge the Employment Equity Amendment Act, 
specifically Section 15(A) even if they use our courts.  
 
Against this background, we call on the courts to refuse to be used as 
instruments to undermine the policies of fundamental transformation in this 
province and country and the remnants of colonialism of a special type and 
apartheid.  I thank you.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member Ngqentsu.  …[Applause.]  
I see the hon Minister Simmers.  
 
Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Agb Deputy  Speaker, die Premier 
178 
 
aanlyn, agb medelede van die Kabinet ook hier teenwoordig en aanlyn, agb 
lede van die Provinsiale Parlement, inwoners van die Wes -Kaap.  Vandag by 
hierdie debat ter herdenking aan Werkersdag, bring ons hulde aan die mense 
wat werklik ons provinsie dra en ons ekonomie dryf:  ons werkers.  
 
Dit is die ambagsmanne, die vakleerlinge, die padwerkers, die kontrakteurs 
en ja, die EPWP werkers.  Dit is hulle wat die fondamente lê vir die Wes -
Kaap van môre en dit is hierdie Regering, die Wes -Kaapse Regering onder die 
leiding van hierdie regerende Demokratiese Alliansie …[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: Hon Deputy Speaker, the Premier 
online, hon members of the Cabinet and online, hon members of the 
Provincial Parliament, citizens of the Western Cape.  Today at this debate to 
commemorate Workers Day we pay tribute to the people who really carry our 
province and drive our economy: our workers.   
 
It is the artisans, the apprentices, the road workers, the contractors and yes, 
the EPWP workers.  It is they who lay the foundation for the Western Cape of 
tomorrow and it is this Government, the Western Cape Government under the 
leadership of this governing Democratic Alliance …[Inerjection.]  
 
† ‘n AGBARE LID:  Die ...[Onhoorbaar.]  
[An  HON MEMBER: The ...[Inaudible.] ] 
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: …wat hulle ondersteun met 
meer as net mooi woorde wat van daardie kant van die Huis af kom.  Ons 
179 
 
skep ŉ provinsie waar werkers as’t ware kan floreer.   
 
Maar, agb Deputy Speaker, ek wil graag begin met ŉ kwessie wat ons almal 
geskok het en ons almal steeds diep raak.  Dit is die George -gebou 
ineenstorting gegewe dat 34 werkers gesterf het en 28 werkers se lewe 
radikaal verander het binne vyf sekondes op ŉ bouterrein.  Ons onthou die 
tragedie steeds elke dag.  Die pyn is steeds vars en die onsekerheid wat heers 
en die talle vrae wat ons almal steeds het, is geregverdig.   
 
En ja, ons almal binne in hierdie Huis en buite, wil die waarheid hê.  Maar 
daardie waarheid moet deur wettige en regverdige prosesse gevind word, 
sonder om die integriteit van moontlike strafregtelike vervolging te 
ondermyn.  Geregtigheid vir die slagoffers, en ek moet weereens benadruk 
wat werkers was en steeds is, vereis geduld en deeglikheid van elkeen van 
ons.  Ons sal nie daardie proses op enige wyse belemmer of benadeel nie.  
 
Agb Deputy  Speaker, ons bou vo ort as ŉ provinsie van hoop op die fondament 
van hoop deur ons werkers.  Om menswaardigheid en inklusiwiteit te 
bevorder, en ons ekonomie te laat groei, sodat meer werksgeleenthede geskep 
kan word vir almal in ons provinsie.  Ja, selfs vir dié in die Sentr aal -Karoo.  
 
Agb Deputy  Speaker, sedert 2019 het my Departement in die Wes -Kaap, meer 
as 64  000 werksgeleenthede geskep deur die Uitgebreide Openbare 
Werkersprogram.  Weereens dit dek alle areas in die Wes -Kaap.  In 2023 
alleen, is meer as 15  000 mense in diens geneem.  Van hierdie mense, 67% is 
180 
 
vroue en 49% is jonger as die ouderdom van 35 jaar.  Hierdie program bereik 
alle gemeenskappe in die provinsie waar dit nie gepolitiseer word, soos in die 
Sentraal -Karoo nie.  
 
Maar werkskepping, agb Deputy  Speaker, gaan hand aan hand met die 
ontwikkeling van vaardigheid.  Sedert 2020, belê hierdie Provinsiale 
Regering deur my Departement, meer as R125 miljoen in beurse en opleiding 
aan meer as 2  000 jongmense wat reeds voordeel hieruit getrek het, en byna 
850 studente wat alreeds tans studeer in velde soos siviele ingenieurswese, 
argitektuur en landmeting.  Maar wat help die skepping van talle 
werkgeleenthede sonder regverdigheid?  ŉ Woord wat ons baie vandag hier 
gehoor het.  
 
Agb Deputy  Speaker, die DA as die regerende party in die Wes -Kaap, 
ondersteun die geveg tans in die Hof teen die Wysigingswet op Gelyke 
Indiensneming.  Hierdie wetgewing wil nasionale rasse -aanstellingsdiktate op 
die privaatsektor -ondernemings afdwing in alle provinsies.  
…[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: …  who supports them with more 
than just nice words coming from that side of the House.  We create a 
province where workers can actually flourish.   
 
But, hon Deputy Speaker, I want to begin with an issue that shocked all of us 
still touches as deeply.  It is the George building collapse given the fact that 
34 workers died and 28 workers lives had radically changed within 5 seconds 
181 
 
on a building site.  We still recall that tragedy every day.  The pain is still 
fresh and the uncertainty and many questions we all still have is justified.  
And yes, all of us in this House and outside want the truth.  But that truth 
must be found through legal and just processes, without undermining the 
integrity of possible legal prosecution.  Justice for the victims, and I must 
again emphasize, that were workers and still are, require patience and 
thoroughness from each of us.  We will not hamper or impair that process.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, we continue to build as a province of hope on the 
foundation of hope through our workers.  To promote human dignity and 
inclusivity and to grow our economy so that more job opportunities can be 
created for everyone in our province.  Yes, even for those in the Central 
Karoo.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, since 2019 my Department in the Western Cape has 
created more than 64 000 job opportunities through the Extended Public 
Works Programme.  Again it covers all areas in the Western Cape.  In 2023 
alone, more than 15 000 people were employed.  Of these people, 67% are 
women and 49% are younger than the age of 35 years.  This program reaches 
all communities in the province where it is not politicized as in the Central 
Karoo.   
 
But job creation, hon Deputy Speaker, goes hand in hand with the 
development of skills. Since 2020, this Provincial Government through my 
Department invests more than R125 million in bursaries and training to more 
182 
 
than 2 000 youths who have already benefited from this, and almost 850 
students who are already studying in fields such as civil engineering, 
architecture and land surveying.  But what does the creation of numerous job 
opportunities mean without fairness.  A word we have heard often here today.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, the DA as the governing party in the Western Cape 
supports the fight currently in the court against the Employment Equity 
Amendment Act.  This legislation wants to force national racial appointment 
dictates upon the private sector enterprises in all provi nces …[Interjection.] ] 
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Dit sê, byvoorbeeld aan ŉ klein 
onderneming in George of ŉ kontrakteur in Malmesbury, dat jy nie mense in 
diens mag neem van daardie area volgens meriete nie.  Hulle wil ons mense 
forseer dat werkers moet aangestel word volgens die nasionale raskwota.  
Hierdie is nie transformasie nie, ANC, en agb Deputy  Speaker, hierdie is die 
bevordering van werkloosheid deur rassekriteria wat die ANC wil dryf deur 
hierdie stukkie wetgew ing, en ons sê nee as die regerende party in die Wes -
Kaap.  [Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: It says, for example to a small 
enterprise in George or a contractor in Malmesbury, that you may not employ 
people from that area based on merit.  They want to force our people that 
workers must be appointed according to the national race quota.  This is not 
transformation, ANC, and hon Deputy Speaker, this is the promotion of 
183 
 
unemployment through racial criteria that the ANC wants to drive through 
this piece of legislation, and we say no as the governing party in the Western 
Cape [Interjection.] ] 
 
† ‘n AGBARE LID: Ons sê nee!  New  
[An HON MEMBER:  We say no! ] 
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: In die Wes -Kaap, glo ons in 
ware gelykheid deur geleenthede, nie gedwonge aanstellings nie, 
...[Tussenwerpsel.] en ons dade wys dit in hierdie provinsie.  
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Sedert 2020, het die Departement van Infrastruktuur 
meer as R1,2 miljard aan plaaslike klein -, medium - en mikro -ondernemings 
toegewys.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Ja, julle kan maar raas.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
Leë blikke maak in elk geval baie geraas.   
 
Agb Deputy  Speaker, kom ek gee vir die leë blikke ŉ praktiese voorbeeld 
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE:  In the Western Ca pe we believe in 
true equality through opportunities, not enforced appointments.  
...[Interjection.] and our deeds show that in this province.  ...[Interjection.]  
Since 2020, the Department of Infrastructure allocated more than R1,2 billion 
to local small, medium, and micro enterprises...[Interjection.]  Yes, you can 
make a noise  ...[Interjection.]  Empty vessels make the most noise in any 
case.   
 
184 
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, let me give the empty vessels a practical 
example...[Interjection.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members.  [Interjections.]  Hon 
members!  [Interjections.]  Hon members, order.  This is the final speaker on 
the Speaker ’s List, and I will request that the hon Minister speaks through 
the Chair.  Thank you.  [Interjections.]  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Baie dankie, agb Deputy  
Speaker.  Weereens, leë blikke maak die meeste geraas, deur u aan die leë 
blikke.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Agb Deputy  Speaker, laat ek prakties wees.  In 
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. 
Again, empty vessels make the most noise, through you to the empty vessels.  
...[Interjection.]  Hon Deputy Speaker, let me be practical.  In 
...[Interjection.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, are you able to take your seat?  
[Interjections.]  
 
Mr  M B NGQENTSU (ANC): Nkosi . [Speaking in vernacular – 3:48:35].  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you prepared to take a question?  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Nee, agb Deputy  Speaker.  Deur 
185 
 
u aan julle.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: No, hon Deputy Speaker .  Through 
you to you  ...[Interjection.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Weereens om te herhaal, agb 
Deputy  Speaker, wat is die praktikaliteit van R1,2 miljard waarvan ek tans 
gepraat het en ek wil ook graag hê ons agb lede, veral van die platteland, 
moet baie mooi luister.   
 
Die TR33 Ceres projek: 339 werksgeleenthede is tot op datum geskep vir 
daardie gemeenskappe.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Ons het ses opkomende 
kontrakteurs alr eeds daar aangestel en bemagtig, en ons gaan ŉ verdere 12 
aanstel.  Dit is die verskil wat hierdie Regering maak.  Die prima:  
...[Tussenwerpsel.] dit is almal plaaslike kontrakteurs wat daar aangestel is.  
Iets wat nie onder die ANC wysigingswetgewing sou  moontlik gewees het 
nie.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
 
Onder die Vissershok N7 -projek op die N7, alreeds meer as 170 
werksgeleenthede is tot op datum geskep. Twee opkomende kontrakteurs van 
die omliggende area is reeds in diens geneem.  Vier plaaslike kontrakteurs is 
aangestel.  Ons sal nog 20 aanstel, maar weereens, was dit vir hierdie 
wysigingswet kon dit nie moontlik gewees het nie.   
 
186 
 
Die R43 tussen Stanford en Gansbaai.  Hierdie is die projek wat ons in 
hierdie maand gaan voltooi.  Ons het 369 werksgeleenthede geskep.  Ons het 
16 plaaslike ondernemers wat betrokke was by die projek.  Maar weereens, 
met hierdie wysigingswet sou dit nie moontlik gewees het nie! 
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: To again repeat, hon Deputy 
Speaker, what is the practicality of 1,2 billion that I spoke of and I also want 
our hon members, especially from the rural areas, to listen carefully.     
 
The TR33 Ceres project: 339 work opportunities have been created to date for 
those communities ...[Interjection.]  We have already appointed and 
empowered six emerging contractors there and we are going to appoint a 
further 12.  That is the difference that this Government makes. The prima:  
...[Interjection.] They are all local contractors that have been appointed 
there.  Something that would not have been possible under the ANC 
amendment legislation.  ...[Interjection.]  
 
Under the Vissershok N7 -project on the N7, already more than 170 work 
opportunities have been created to date.  Two emerging contractors of the 
surrounding area have already been employed.  For local contractors were 
appointed.  We will still appoint another 20 but again, with this amendment 
act it would not have been possible.   
 
The R43 between Stanford and Gansbaai.  This is the project that we are 
going to complete this month.  We have created 369 job opportunities.  We 
187 
 
have 16 local undertakers who have been involved with the project.  But 
again, with this amendment act it would not have been possible! 
...[Interjection.] ] 
 
An  HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!  
 
†Di e MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Dit is volhoubare ekonomiese 
inklusiwiteit, agb Deputy  Speaker, sonder dwang, sonder rasseskreed of 
sonder enige rassekategorisering.  Werklik mense wat ons ŉ geleentheid wou 
gegee het as die regerende party in hierdie provinsie. [Tussenwerpsel.]  
 
Waarom belê ons so ernstig in infrastruktuur? [Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: It is sustainable economic 
inclusivity, hon Deputy Speaker, without force, without racial screed or 
without any racial categorizing.  Tru ly people that we wanted to give an 
opportunity as the governing party in this province.  [Interjection.]  
 
Why do we invest so seriously in infrastructure? [Interjection.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, please take your seat.  I see the 
Chief Whip.  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon MEC promised the 
people of Murraysburg houses.  There now, he is speaking about the 
vulnerable that he has taken care of.  [Interjections.]  Can he start there?  
188 
 
[Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ba ns, that is not a point of order.   
[Interjections.]  Please proceed.  [Interjections.]  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: En waarom belê ons so ernstig 
in infrastruktuur?  Dit is omdat ons besef infrastruktuur is ŉ ekonomiese 
dryfkrag van ŉ suksesvolle provinsie en ŉ suksesvolle munisipaliteit.  In 
hierdie provinsie dra die konstruksiesektor 5,3% aan die Wes -Kaapse BBP by, 
maar die afgeleide effek is veel groter as vanaf 5,3%.  Daar word bereken, en 
dankie aan die Provinsiale Tesourie vir dit, vir elke R1 wat ons belê in 
infrastruktuur as ŉ provinsiale regering, genereer dit tussen R1,80 tot R3,30 
elders stroomaf in die ekonomie.  [Tussenwerpsel.]  So, ons sien goeie 
infrastruktuur as ŉ ware werkersreg.   
 
Agb Deputy  Speaker, op hierdie Werkersdag -herdenking, die ironie dat ons 
iets herdenk ...[Tussenwerpsel.] wat die ANC oor 30 jaar so afgebreek het.  
Stuur die Wes -Kaap as ŉ provinsiale regering ŉ duidelike boodskap uit na 
almal daar buite wat na ons provinsie toe kom vir geleenthede.  In hierdie 
provinsie  skep ons die omgewing waar ons saam met die privaatsektor werk 
skep.  Ons praat nie daaroor jaar na jaar soos die regerende party op 
nasionale vlak was voor 2024 nie.  In hierdie provinsie ontwikkel ons 
vaardigheid.  Ons skep nie net hol strukture vir kamerade nie.  
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Ons beskerm vryheid.  Ja, ons gaan self tot in die hof vir 
die werkersvryhe de en ons bou ŉ provinsie waar elke werker ongeag hul ras 
189 
 
of hul seksuele oriëntering, plek of partykeer kan floreer in die Wes -Kaap 
want hierdie is ŉ regering en ŉ provinsie vir alle mense wat na hom toe kom 
vir geleenthede.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Want dit  is die ware ondersteuning wat 
werkers benodig.   
 
Maar ek luister na die insette deur u, agb Deputy  Speaker, ...[Tussenwerpsel.] 
na ons Opposisie en ek moet benadruk in baie mooi Afrikaans die kwynende 
Opposisie want hulle wil nie die realiteit besef ...[Tussenwerpsel.] vir hulle 
swak regering vir 30 jaar toe hulle die land alleen regeer het nie. 
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  En die kiesers het gedink wat hulle dink van die laaste 
regering. ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Dit is hoekom julle op 40% party op nasionale 
vlak is.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: And why do we invest so seriously 
in infrastructure?  It is because we realize nfrastructure [Interjection.] is an 
economic driving force of a successful province and a successful 
municipality.  In this province with the construction sector contributes 5,3% 
to the Western Cape GDP, but the eventual effect is much greater as from 
5,3%.  It is estimated, and thanks to the Provincial Treasury for this, for 
every R1 that we invest in infrastructure as a provincial government, it 
generates between R1,80 to R3,30 somewhere else downstream in the 
economy.  [Interjection.]  So, we see good nfrastructure as a real worker ’s 
right.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, on this Workers’ Day commemoration, the irony that we 
are commemorating something ...[Interjection.] by the ANC has broken down 
190 
 
over 30 years.  The Western Cape as a provincial government sends out a 
clear message to all out there who are coming to our province for 
opportunities.  In this province we create an environment where we along 
with the private sector create work.  We don’t talk about it ...[Interjection.] 
year after year like the governing party at national level before 2024.  In this 
province we develop skills.  We do not just create hollow structures for 
comrades ...[Interjection.]  We protect freedom.  He is the even go to the 
court for the workers rights and we build a province where every worker 
irrespective of race or sexual orientation, place or party can flourish in the 
Western Cape, because this is a government and a province for all people who 
come for opportunities ...[Interjection.]  Because that is the real support that 
worker need.   
 
But I listen to the input through you hon Deputy Speaker, ...[Interjection.] to 
our Opposition and I must emphasize in very nice Afrikaans the withering 
Opposition because they do not want to realize the reality ...[Interjection.] 
for their poor government for 30 years when they governed the country alone 
...[Interjection.]  And the voters had thought what they thought of the last 
government ...[Interjection.]  That is why you are at 40% at national level.  
...[Interjection.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members!  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Dit is hoekom julle net agt 
...[Tussenwerpsel.] lede in hierdie Wetgewer is.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.] 
191 
 
…[Applause.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: That is why you have only 
eight...[Interjection.] members in this Legislature ...[Interjection.] 
…[Applause.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon members!  Hon Minister, I was 
...[Interjections.]  Hon members, order!  [Interjections.]  The running 
commentary ...[Interjections.]  Hon member Windvogel, hon member 
Nkondlo!  The running commentary is getting to a point where it is drowning 
out the speaker.  I see the hon Minister. …[Applause.]  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (DA): Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  I was going to rise 
on Rule 39 and 40 for the exact same reason that I actually cannot hear the 
hon Minister on this side because the hon members are drowning out the hon 
member.  Thank you.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I almost wanted to say it is nonsense 
that this particular Sitting is almost coming to an end because I am enjoying 
the energy, and that we are discussing vital matters here.  [Interjections.]  
But let us see the hon Minister.  I have already spoken directly to it.  Hon 
members, …[Interjections.]  there are less than two minutes.  Hon member 
Nkondlo, there are less than two minutes remaining.  I see the hon Minister.  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Agb Deputy  Speaker, deur u.  
Wat die Opposisie in hierdie Huis nie besef nie is hulle haak vas in die 
192 
 
verlede.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Hulle gaan vashaak in die verlede dat die land 
agteruit gegaan het onder hulle as regerende party en dit is hoekom hulle 
vandag in die Opposisiebanke in hierdie ...[Tussenwerpsels.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: Hon Deputy Speaker, through you.  
What the opposition in this house does not realize is that they get stuck in the 
past.  ...[Interjection.]  They are going to get stuck in the past , that the 
country has gone backward under them as governing party and that is why 
today in the Opposition benches in this ...[Interjections.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members.  [Interjections.]  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: ...jaar sit.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE : ...year sit.  ...[Interjection.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members.  [Interjections.]  Hon 
members, I had the benefit of having the hon Minister closer than what hon 
Minister Baartman has and even now, I could not hear him.  Please.  There is 
one minute and 22 seconds  remaining.  There are still people watching us 
online.  Hon member Masipa?  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker …[Interjection.]  
 
Mr  N P MASIPA (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, I think it is very unfair.  You 
know, we could not even hear half of the speech of the hon Minister.  
[Interjections.]  Can the hon Minister be given more time just so that we can 
193 
 
hear him.  [Interjections.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: What will happen, any hon member that is wanting 
to look at the speech can look at Hansard and the hon Minister, thank you 
also hon Minister that you have been vocal and that the mics are working.  
So, hon members, we will look at the one minute and 22 seconds.  I will not 
entertain any further hands in this regard.  …[Interjection.]  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, do not supress me.  It is the 
second time.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me hear you.  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): It is the second time.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, let me hear you.  
 
The  CHIEF WHIP (ANC): You are not going to supress me.  Hon Deputy 
Speaker, I have noticed with you, there is a tendency to supress this side in 
terms of raising hands.  Hon member Masipa and that hon member next to 
him, constantly raise and you recognise them, and they started this noise.  
They started it.  So, we are giving back what they give us, and you never 
ruled on it.  [Interjections.]  Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me rule.  I have seen hon member Walters’ 
194 
 
hand.  I am not going to take your hand, hon member Walters.  Hon Minister, 
please conclude.  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Agb Deputy  Speaker, maar ek 
verstaan hoekom ons Opposisie in hierdie provinsie reageer soos hulle 
reageer, want hulle staan beskaamd vir die huidige waarin hulle hierdie 
werkers in hierdie land gedompel het.  ...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Hulle val die 
werkers as’t ware in elke stukkie wetgewing aan wat hulle bring 
...[Tussenwerpsel.] spreek nie van neutraliteit van die werkers op die grond 
nie.  Maar twee ...[Tussenwerpsels.]  
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: Hon Deputy Speaker, but I 
understand why our opposition in this province react s as they react, because 
they are ashamed of the present in which they have dumped these workers in 
this country ...[Interjection.]  They actually attack the workers in every piece 
of legislation that they bring ...[Interjection.] do not speak of neutrality of 
the workers on the ground.  But two ...[Interjections.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members.  Please take your seat.  
[Interjections.]  Please take your seat.  [Interjections.]  Hon members, what is 
…[Interjections.]  Hon members, what is ultimately happening here, you are 
affording the hon Minister each and every time, an opportunity to state 
himself as clearly as possible and then, you are interrupting him.  Then, he is 
then preparing his remarks in his mind even more clearly and then you are 
giving him that opportunity the whole time.  Let us afford the hon Minister 
the one minute before we conclude this Sitting.   
195 
 
 
Hon member Booysen, I am not going to recognise you, hon member 
Booysen.  There is one minute.  Let me supress the people on this side.  Hon 
member Stoffel, are you okay with that?  So, thank you, hon member 
Booysen.  There is one minute remaining.  Please let us see the hon Minister.  
 
†Die  MINISTER VAN INFRASTRUKTUUR: Agb Deputy  Speaker, ter 
afsluiting en ek wil graag aan hierdie werkers nie net van die Wes -Kaap nie, 
maar baie volgens en buite ons grense sê.  Daar is ŉ gedig deur C Louis 
Leipoldt wat presies die gedrag en die karaktereienskappe van ons Opposisie 
in hierdie provinsie uitbeeld.  Hierdie gedig se naam is ‘Die Miskruier’ en ek 
gaan ŉ spesifieke seksie aanhaal uit hierdie klassieke gedig, wat hy sê:  
 
“Dis t og so swaar om in die hete sand  
So voort te spartel  
Ek wed sy kloutjies is al seer verbrand,  
Altwee sy ogies met souttraantjies vol.”  
 
En dit is wat die Opposisie van hierdie provinsie vir die werkers beteken.  
Hulle kan niks vir hulle doen nie want hulle het ŉ geleentheid gehad, toe val 
hulle.  Op nasionale vlak het die kiesers vir hulle gewys in 2024, julle is 
besig om te kwyn en binnekort gaan julle as ŉ party sterf.  
...[Tussenwerpsel.]  Baie dankie en sterkte vir die werkers van die Wes -Kaap.  
Dankie.  …[A pplous.]   
[The MINISTER OF INFRASTRUCTURE: Hon Deputy Speaker, to conclude 
196 
 
and I would like to say to these workers not only of the Western Cape but 
many along and outside our borders.  There is a poem by  C Louis Leipoldt 
that illustrates the behavior and characteristics of our opposition in this 
province precisely.  This poem’s name is ‘Die Miskruier ’  (The Dung Beetle) 
and I am going to quote a specific section from this classic poem, where he 
says:  
 
“Dis tog so swaar om in die hete sand  
So voort te spartel  
Ek wed sy kloutjies is al seer verbrand,  
Altwee sy ogies met souttraantjies vol.”  
 
And that is what the Opposition in this province means to the workers.  They 
can do nothing for them because they had an opportunity, but then they fell.  
At national level the voters showed them in 2024, you are busy deteriorating 
and soon you are going to die as a party  ...[Interjection.]  Thank you and all 
the best for the workers of the Western Cape.  Thank you.  …[Applause.] ] 
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister.  That concludes the list.  
I will now recognise the hon Speaker.  
 
The  SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.  Hon Deputy 
Speaker, it would be remiss of me not to quote Rule 147(1).  Hon Deputy 
Speaker:  
 
197 
 
“The Speaker may from time to time, but limited to once a month, 
identify topics of provincial interest and of a non -party political nature 
for debate in the House.”  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, I was listening to this debate today and I must say that 
in the interest of the citizens of this province, I falled for this debate.  The 
intention was never for it to end up or have the House end up in the situation 
that we ended up today.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, my plea and call to the hon members of the House is 
that for speakers’ debates, that a plea does not end up in a party -political 
debate and for that reason, the Speaker and thank goodness I did not partake 
in this debate today.  It is for that reason that the Speaker or the Deputy 
Speaker should not be on the floor and on the Speakers’ List, so that we do 
not have to engage in a party -political spat between different ideologies.   
 
And whether it is right or wrong, because we are all elected, and we all have 
constituents that we represent.  But for future, hon members, please, in terms 
of the Rules this debate or the Speakers’ debate is not intended for a party -
political contestation.  
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, thank you very much to all the hon members for 
participating in the debate.  Hon Deputy Speaker, being a politician or being 
in politics is more than just a job or just working.  It is a calling to serve 
with purpose and conviction.  It is about standing up for those without a 
198 
 
voice, carrying the weight of others’ hopes.   
 
Hon Deputy Speaker, true leadership is not found in the titles, but in the 
courage to make a real difference.  May we always stay grounded and faithful 
because all of us that are in service, matter.  I thank you.  …[Applause.]  
 
The  DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Speaker.  Hon members, that 
concludes the business for the day.  The House is now adjourned.  
 
The House adjourned at 18:15.  
 
 