



José Antonio Primo de Rivera - Wikipedia































Jump to content

	
		
			
				

	
	

Main menu
	
	


				
		

	
	Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Navigation
	
	
		
		
			
			
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
		
		
	


	

	
		Contribute
	
	
		
		
			
			
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Special pages
		
		
	




				

	


		
			

	
	
		
		
	


		
		
			

	

Search
	
	
		
			
				
					
						
						
					
					
				
				Search
			
		
	


			
	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	
		

	
	

Appearance
	
	


			
				
			
		
	


	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
Donate


Create account


Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	

	
	

Personal tools
	
	


		

	
		
		
			


Donate




Create account




Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	




		
	


	
		
			
		
		
			
		
			
				
				
				
		
		
	
	
				
					
					
	
	
Contents
	move to sidebar
	hide



	
		

			
				(Top)
			
		
		

		
			
				1
				Biography
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Biography subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					1.1
					Early life
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					1.2
					Falangist leader
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					1.3
					Imprisonment and execution
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				2
				Post-mortem relevance
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Post-mortem relevance subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					2.1
					Burial
				
			
			
			
				

			
				
					2.1.1
					Reburial at the Valley of the Fallen
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					2.1.2
					Reburial at San Isidro cemetery, Madrid
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
		
	
	
	

		
			
				3
				Ideology
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				4
				Genealogy
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				5
				Notes
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				6
				References
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				7
				Bibliography
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				8
				External links
			
		
		
		
		
	



					
		
			
		
		
			
				
					
						

	
	

Toggle the table of contents
	
	


							
			
		
	


					
					José Antonio Primo de Rivera
			

	
	

46 languages
	
	

		
			
			
				
				
Aragonés
العربية
مصرى
Asturianu
Български
Brezhoneg
Català
Čeština
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Esperanto
Español
Euskara
Estremeñu
فارسی
Suomi
Français
Gaeilge
Galego
עברית
Magyar
Interlingua
Bahasa Indonesia
Ido
Italiano
日本語
ქართული
한국어
Latina
Lëtzebuergesch
Lingua Franca Nova
Nederlands
Norsk nynorsk
Norsk bokmål
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
吴语
粵語
中文
			
			Edit links
		

	


				
					
						
							
								

	
		
		
			
Article


Talk


			
		
		
	


								

	
	English
	
	


					

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


				
	


							
						
						
							
			    

	
		
		
			
Read


Edit


View history


			
		
		
	


			

							
								

	
	

Tools
	
	


									
						

	
	Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Actions
	
	
		
		
			


Read




Edit




View history


			
		
		
	



	
		General
	
	
		
		
			
			
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Switch to legacy parser
		
		
	



	
		Print/export
	
	
		
		
			
			
Download as PDF
Printable version
		
		
	



	
		In other projects
	
	
		
		
			
			
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikidata item
		
		
	




									
				
	


							
						
					
				
				
					
						
							
				
							
		
						
							
				
	
	Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide





							
		
					
				
				
					
							
		

						From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
						
						
					
					
					Spanish politician and founder of Falange Española (1903–1936)
In this Spanish name, the first or paternal surname is  Primo de Rivera and the second or maternal family name is  Sáenz de Heredia.



José Antonio Primo de Rivera
Portrait of Primo De Rivera

Member of the Cortes
In office30 November 1933 – 7 January 1936
ConstituencyCádiz


Personal details
BornJosé Antonio Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia24 April 1903Madrid, Kingdom of Spain
Died20 November 1936(1936-11-20) (aged 33)Alicante, Spanish Republic
Cause of deathExecution by firing squad
Resting place

Saint Isidore Cemetery, Madrid (since 2023)

Valley of the Fallen, San Lorenzo de El Escorial (1959–2023)


Party

FE de las JONS (1934–1936)

Falange Española (1933–1934)

Movimiento Español Sindicalista (1933)

National Monarchist Union (1930–1933)


Parent
Miguel Primo de Rivera (father)
Relatives
Miguel Primo de Rivera (brother)
Pilar Primo de Rivera (sister)
EducationUniversity of Madrid
Occupation
Lawyer
Politician
Military service
Branch/serviceVolunteer[1]
Years of service1923–1924[1]
RankReserve second lieutenant[1]
UnitHúsares de la Princesa [es][1]


José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia, 1st Duke of Primo de Rivera, 3rd Marquis of Estella GE (24 April 1903 – 20 November 1936), often referred to simply as José Antonio, was a Spanish national syndicalist politician who founded the Falange Española ("Spanish Phalanx"), later Falange Española de las JONS.


José Antonio was the eldest son of General Miguel Primo de Rivera (2nd Marquess of Estella), dictator of Spain from 1923 to 1930. He worked as a lawyer from 1927 to 1933 before entering politics through the National Monarchist Union, an enterprise he initially engaged in because of his vows to defend his recently deceased father's memory. After becoming disillusioned with the traditionalist monarchist policies, he founded the short lived Movimiento Español Sindicalista alongside Julio Ruiz de Alda. Soon after he founded Falange Española in October 1933, shortly before running as a candidate in the 1933 general election, in which he won a seat in the Congress of Deputies of the Second Spanish Republic. He assumed the role of messianic leader and charged himself with the task of saving Spain in founding a national syndicalist party, but he encountered difficulties widening his support base during his entire political life.[2]


In 1936, he endorsed the Spanish nationalist military coup against the Second Spanish Republic that led to a civil war that he later attempted to stop.[3] Imprisoned before the start of the war, he was accused of conspiracy and military rebellion against the government of the republic and was sentenced to death and executed by firing squad during the first months of the war.


In life, he held the nobiliary title of 3rd Marquis of Estella, Grandee of Spain. In 1948, he was posthumously given the title of Duke of Primo de Rivera, which was subsequently passed to his brother Miguel. The image of José Antonio was revered during the war by the Nationalist faction, and after the establishment of Francoist Spain he was regarded as a martyr, and used as a tool of the Francoist propaganda apparatus. The inscription of "José Antonio ¡Presente!" could be found in many churches all across Spain.


Biography[edit]

Early life[edit]

José Antonio Primo de Rivera was born on Calle de Génova (Madrid) on April 24, 1903, the eldest son of the military officer Miguel Primo de Rivera y Orbaneja (who would later govern Spain as dictator from 1923 to 1930) and Casilda Sáenz de Heredia y Suárez de Argudín.[4] From his father he inherited the title of Marquis of Estella. He never married.

José Antonio Primo de Rivera can be seen at the left of the picture as member of the Boy Scouts during a visit of Alfonso XIII in 1918.

His mother died when he was five years old, and he was subsequently raised by his father's sister, Maria Jesus Primo de Rivera y Orbaneja.[5] He was privately taught at home, and learned English and French.[6][7] When at university, he did not attend lectures until the second year of his undergraduate studies.[8] He spent his summer holidays at the country estate of an uncle, where he practiced horseriding and hunting.[9]


Primo de Rivera went on to study law at the University of Madrid between 1917 and 1923. He helped to organize the student union there, Federación Universitaria Escolar, which opposed the higher-education policies of his father.[clarification needed] He took undergraduate and graduate courses simultaneously and he obtained both his Bachelor and Doctor degrees in the same year, 1923.[10]



After graduating, he chose the "One-Year Volunteer" option to do his military service while his father was dictator. He served with the Ninth Dragoons of St. James cavalry regiment, stationed at Barcelona. In 1930, he was court-martialed for punching a superior officer, the future Nationalist army leader, Brigadier General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano. The incident occurred at the Lyon d'Or café in the Calle Alcalá and resulted in Primo de Rivera being dishonourably discharged.[11]


Queipo de Llano had written a defamatory letter against an uncle of José Antonio and against the Dictator himself. José Antonio, ready to defend the honour of his family abused by the Republican general, went to the café where the latter used to socialize, and after asking whether he was the author of the writing, and after receiving the general's affirmative reply, delivered a spectacular punch that made the general roll on the floor, sparking a free-for-all between the companions of José Antonio and the companions of the general.[9]



Queipo de Llano had been a Republican in the time of the Rivera dictatorship, but is today remembered mostly as a notorious Francoist war criminal in the Civil War. At the time, it led to increased right-wing suspicions of Queipo de Llano.[12]


Primo de Rivera became a registered lawyer in 1925, and opened an office on a side street of Madrid very near the confluence of three principal avenues.[13]


A relatively successful lawyer not involved nor expected to be involved in politics before 1930, the José Antonio Primo de Rivera decided to do so after the death of his father in his Parisian self-exile in 1930; this was for him a way to defend the memory of his father, whose work at government had often been derided.[14]


In February 1931, Primo de Rivera served as the witness for Ramón Serrano Suñer at his wedding with Ramona (Zita) Polo y Martínez-Valdés, Franco's sister-in-law.[15]


In 1931, he was invested "Perpetual Dean of the Illustrious College of Lawyers of Madrid".[16]


He ran for office under the banner of the National Monarchist Union but failed to get elected.[unreliable source?][17]


He was detained briefly in 1932 for collaboration in General José Sanjurjo's attempted coup.[17]


Falangist leader[edit]
Alfonso García Valdecasas, Ruiz de Alda and Primo de Rivera in the 1933 foundational meeting.

On October 29, 1933, Primo de Rivera launched the Falange Española ("Spanish Phalanx"), a nationalist party, inspired in part with some ideas, such as the necessity of authority, hierarchical order of society, and grassroots populism, that were being expounded in Italy in the Fascist movement. The foundational convention was held in the Teatro de la Comedia of Madrid. He was the keynote speaker and his first address was a criticism of liberal democracy. In the speech he claimed the liberal state was not justified in its existence, criticised Rousseau, claimed democracy was hypocritical, and called on violence against the Spanish government.[18] During the speech he made remarks stating that  violence was needed. Rivera claimed that certain goals could only be achieved through violence, and that the situation called only for insurrection.[18][19]


Stanley G. Payne argues that Rivera's view that violence was acceptable if done for a just cause was paralleled by that of the Spanish Left, who held similar views on the use of violence; unlike the Italian fascists, the Falange never developed a sophisticated theory for their doctrine of violence. Payne argues that because his father had ruled as a dictator with relatively minimal violence during the quieter 1920s, Rivera naively assumed he could impose a new authoritarian system with relatively limited violence, but he would eventually find himself caught in a spiral of killing that he could not control.[20] When he founded the Falange, Antonio was more reluctant to use violence than other leading members of the party; he did not seem to expect violence from the political Left to be directed against the party. However, after Juan Cuéllar's death, he seemed to overcome his reluctance and thus intermittent killings on both sides would continue.[21]


Rivera's closing words on the eve of the 1933 Spanish general election made explicit his Romantic nationalism. Stating that the people of Spain would need to make sacrifices in the name of nationalism. And claiming that right-wing parties in the election would not attain his desired result. Despite being a candidate he stated "I take part in these elections without faith or respect." Finally closing with a statement for political action outside of the official government.[18]


He was a candidate in the general election of November 19 for the umbrella organization "Unión Agraria y Ciudadana," part of the broad conservative coalition Confederación Española de Derechas Autónomas (CEDA).[13] He was elected to the Parliament as a representative of Cádiz.


In his first parliamentary intervention he answered Gil-Robles—the founder of CEDA—who had just spoken out against all totalitarian forms of government for arrogating to themselves the attributes of God and crushing the personality of the individual. Rivera was elected under a shock coalition formed between the Radical Republican Party and CEDA, meaning he entered government. The agreement would collapse support for the Radicals, which had previously Spain's largest Republican party during the 1936 Spanish general election. In the speech he moderated some of his positions, claimed no individual or social class holds all the power in society. Also stating that the state should follow Rousseau's ideals of representing the will of the people. Claimed that "goodness and truth are perennial tributaries of reason" and closed calling for unity towards a "permanent aspiration."[22]


On February 11, 1934, Falange merged with Ramiro Ledesma's Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista to create the Falange Española de las JONS under José Antonio's leadership.[17] The antisemitic positions within FE de las JONS were mainly led by Onésimo Redondo, with Ledesma and Primo de Rivera largely indifferent to the issue;[23] however, Falangists attacked the Jewish-owned SEPU department stores in the spring of 1935;[24] In the view of Gonzalo Álvarez Chillida, both José Antonio and Ledesma probably thought that such antisemitic raids could enhance mobilization within the purportedly threatened small-business sector.[23] He shared with other rightists the belief that violence was legitimate against a Republic that he perceived as influenced by communists, Jews and Freemasons.[25][26]
Photographed during a political rally (c. 1935–36). The Falangist blue shirt was an emblematic uniform embodying the idea of the Falangist discipline, hierarchy and violence, as well as, often dressed with the top button unbuttoned, it contributed to the discourse of masculine "virility".[27]

The upper-class José Antonio abandoned the tie and suit and took on the new blue-shirt Falange uniform (despite later mocking JAP militants because of this, the Falangists were originally dressed in suit and tie); the uniform, adopted in October 1935, was deliberately chosen as a reference to Italian Fascism.[28]


In 1935 Primo de Rivera collaborated in editing the lyrics of the Falangist anthem, "Cara al Sol" (Face to the Sun).[29]


Every member of the Falange had to obey unquestioningly. They were told:


The honour and task of Falange must be gauged by those who carry the burden of leadership on their shoulders. Do not forget that one of the rules of our code of ethics is to have faith in the leaders. Your leaders are always right.[30]



Prior to general elections of February 16, 1936, Primo discussed with Gil-Robles the question of Falange joining CEDA-led electoral alliances. He was offered 3 places, including the one in Salamanca which virtually guaranteed the mandate. However, Primo was not satisfied with the proposal, rejected it and decided that Falange candidates would run on their own.[31]


Primo fielded his personal candidature in 13 electoral districts, always as individual non-aligned Falange candidate. In total, he won 24,017 votes. He performed best in Cádiz (he was supported by 7,499 voters, it is 4.66% of all voters), followed by Cáceres (4,427; 2.30%), Valladolid (2,793; 2.15%), Madrid city (4,995; 1.20%), Seville city (942; 0.79%),  Toledo (1,479; 0.67%), Huesca (260; 0.27%), Oviedo (818; 0.25%), Ciudad Real (269; 0.14%), Orense (141; 0.08%), La Coruña (217; 0.07%), Albacete (87; 0.06%), and Baleares (90; 0.06%).[32]


In Cuenca (where Primo did not run) the elections were initially declared invalid due to massive irregularities; they were to be repeated on May 3. This time the agreement with Gil-Robles was successfully concluded and Primo de Rivera was fielded on the list of a joint counter-revolutionary bloc. At this point electoral authorities changed the original decision and declared that the Cuenca elections, scheduled for May, would not be repeated elections, but the second round of indecisive February 16 elections. The change rendered Primo's candidature invalid, as in the second round only candidates running in the first round were allowed to stand (in case of repeated elections an entirely new set of candidates was possible). Some scholars claim that the decision was taken exactly to prevent Primo from standing.[33] Despite this, Primo did not withdraw (unusually, according to the Spanish electoral law of the time, invalid candidates were allowed to remain on electoral lists, with votes for them discounted). There were 45,828 voters (44.38%) who supported Primo, even though most of them were probably aware that their votes would be discounted.[34]


Falange won only 0.1% of the vote; but the wave of instability which greeted the victory of the Popular Front—a left-wing coalition of anarchists, communists, socialists, liberal republicans like the radicals, and others—caused an influx of new members, and the minuscule party grew to more than 40,000 members by July.


Imprisonment and execution[edit]

On March 14, 1936, he was arrested in Madrid and charged with illegal possession of firearms (at that time, Spain was awash in privately held weapons on the part of all political factions).[35] Nine weeks later he was transferred to the prison in Alicante. In both Madrid and in Alicante, he was able to maintain intermittent secret contact with the Falange leadership and, several times, with General Emilio Mola. Notably, while writing to Mola of the importance of the Army to a counter-revolution against the Second Republic, Primo de Rivera said "Without your force it will be titanically difficult for us to conquer".[36] Negotiation between Primo and Mola began on 29 May.[37] The two developed a provisional agreement which specified that, in the rebellion, no more than a third of forces of the Falange in any specific area were to come under the direction of the Army.[38] On October 3 he was charged with conspiracy against the Republic and military insurrection, both capital offences. Primo de Rivera conducted his own defence.[39] On November 18 he was found guilty by a people's tribunal and sentenced to death by firing squad. The three career judges who participated in the trial, along with the popular tribunal, asked for the death sentence be commuted to life imprisonment but this was rejected by the majority of government ministers (the two ministers from Izquierda Republicana voted against the death sentence).[40] The sentence was carried out on November 20 by local authorities in Alicante.


In his will, he professed his innocence and defended the case of his brother. He made specific wills on what was to happen to his belongings and assigned close companions to retrieve debts owed to him in order to pass it on to those he willed it to. One of the most significant clauses in his will assigned his companions to "destroy all of those of deeply personal character, those containing merely literary work, and those which are mere sketches and drafts in any early stage of development..."[5]


From his will:
"As for my approaching death, I await it without vainglory, for it is never a gay thing to die at my age, but without complaint. May God Our Lord accept it for what sacrifice it may contain, in partial reparation for all there has been of egotism and vanity in much of my life. I forgive with all my heart everyone who may have harmed or offended me, without exception, and I beg the forgiveness of all those to whom I owe reparation for my injury great or small. Which being accomplished, I procced to order my last Will..."[5]
It is said by some[weasel words] that the Republic offered the Nationalists a prisoner exchange involving Primo de Rivera and a son of the Republic's head of government Francisco Largo Caballero[41] and that Franco turned down the offer. Others contend that it was the Republican government who rejected the deal of the Nationalists and that General Franco approved several failed commando raids on the Alicante prison to try to rescue José Antonio. Either way the death of the founder of Falange rid the general of a formidable rival. Perhaps tellingly, it was well known that the two men disliked each other.[42] Much of this disagreement arose because Primo de Rivera strived to become the political leader of the Nationalist uprising. After one of the two meetings they had, Franco dismissed José Antonio as "a playboy pinturero" (a foppish playboy).[43] Elizabeth Bibesco's last novel, The Romantic, published in 1940, starts with a dedication to José Antonio Primo de Rivera, whom she had known during her stay in Madrid where her husband, Prince Antoine Bibesco, was a diplomat from Romania in Spain between 1927 and 1931: "To José Antonio Primo de Rivera. I promised you a book before it was begun. It is yours now that it is finished – Those we love die for us only when we die–".[44]


Post-mortem relevance[edit]
Plaque in Los Llanos de Aridane

With Primo de Rivera's approval, the Falange joined the military uprising against the Republic in 1936. The initially marginal party gained ascendancy over the course of the war, partly as a result of its prominent role in the brutal repression that took place behind Nationalist lines.[45] Nevertheless, the party lost autonomy, and in 1937 was made wholly subservient to the will of General Franco when he had Primo de Rivera's temporary replacement, Manuel Hedilla Larrey, thrown in jail, tried and sentenced to death (although his sentence was commuted).[46] Franco decreed the merging of the Falange Española de las JONS with the Carlist traditionalists through the Unification Decree, and became the national chief of the new party, FET y de las JONS.


The reign of Francisco Franco nurtured a convenient cult of personality around the dead figure of Primo de Rivera whom Falangists dubbed "El Ausente" (The Missing One).[47] This name was created during the period after Primo de Rivera's execution but before this was officially confirmed to the Nationalist public at large by its leadership on 18 July 1938. While the Falangist leadership knew the truth, they chose to keep it a secret for fear of the impact it would have on morale, though rumours of his death would continue to circulate for the period. Thus until this date many Falangists had lived in hope that Primo de Rivera would still return (commonly saying "when José Antonio comes back") and began referring to him as "The Absent One", a reference to the Falange's tradition of calling "present!" when the names of the fallen were read out.[48] The founder of Falange was anointed a martyr of the "crusade against Marxism." Notwithstanding the apparent veneration by the Francoist State, it remains true that the Missing One's demise had removed a dangerous opponent: Primo de Rivera had been marquis, a doctor of civil law, a political thinker; Franco owned no comparable pedigree, no comparable education and no personal ideology.


The postwar cult of personality had two ubiquitous icons. The first, a funereal slab placed on the external wall of many churches and cathedrals which bore the crowning inscription, Caídos por Dios y por España ("Fallen for God and for Spain"), followed by a list of local Nationalists killed during the war; Primo de Rivera's name headed every list.[49] The second was the rallying cry, "José Antonio—¡Presente!," a figurative reply to an imaginary roll call invoking his ghostly attendance or immanence.


With the arrival of democratic rule, the legacy of Primo de Rivera and the cult of personality created by the Spanish state started to wane circumspectly. In 1981, the Madrid City Council moved to reinstate the original name of its grand avenue, the Gran Vía, which Franco had renamed "Avenida José Antonio Primo de Rivera" in 1939. However, as late as March 2005, the Guadalajara City Council removed a memorial to the founder of the Falange under cover of darkness.[50]


Burial[edit]

At the end of the war in 1939, the remains of Primo de Rivera were carried on the shoulders of Falangist relay teams from Alicante to Madrid (a 300-kilometre journey) and provisionally interred at El Escorial. The church had contained the pantheon of Spanish monarchs but Primo de Rivera was buried directly in front of the altar.[51][52][53]

Reburial at the Valley of the Fallen[edit]

In 1959, Primo de Rivera was exhumed and re-interred 13 km away in the basilica of the Valley of the Fallen, located in the Guadarrama mountain range.[54]
Between 1975 and 2019 Francisco Franco was buried nearby.


In the context of making the site less partisan, Franco's remains were removed from the Valley. This did not establish a clear precedent for moving Primo de Rivera, given that he died a victim of the Civil War like most of the other burials at the site. However, in late 2022 it was reported that Primo de Rivera's family had requested the exhumation of his remains on the grounds that the deceased wanted a Catholic burial. The Democratic Memory Law of 2022 envisaged the future of the Valley of the Fallen as a civil cemetery, and accordingly the government proposed to deconsecrate the crypt of the church in order to promote national reconciliation.[55]

Reburial at San Isidro cemetery, Madrid[edit]

Primo de Rivera's family arranged for his remains to be exhumed from the Valley in April 2023 and reburied in Saint Isidore Cemetery in Madrid.[56]


Ideology[edit]

Part of a series on
Falangism


Organizations

Falange Española

Falange Española de las JONS

FET y de las JONS

Falange Española de las JONS (Auténtica)

Falange Española de las JONS (1976)

New Force

Falange Española Independiente

National Alliance July 18

Falange Española Auténtica

Falangist Movement of Spain

National Union

Unidad Falangista Montañesa

National Front

La Falange

Republican Social Movement

Falange Auténtica


History

Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista (1931–1934)

Movimiento Español Sindicalista (1933)

Falange Española (1933–1934)

Falange Española de las JONS (1934–1937)

FET y de las JONS (1937–1977)

Spanish Civil War (1936–1939)

Unification Decree (1937)

Francoist Spain (1936–1975)

Camisas viejas


Ideology

National syndicalism

Fascism

Third Position

Totalitarianism

Class collaboration

Corporatism

Nationalism

Revolutionary

Unionism

Catholic

Hispanidad

Social revolution

Social justice


PeopleJosé Antonio Primo de Rivera

Alcázar

Almagro

Álvarez

Ansaldo

Arrese

Aznar

Borrás

Buxadé

Carulla

Combina (early)

Dávila

Durruti

Fernández-Cuesta

Ferreira

Franco

García Serrano

García Valdecasas

Gemayel

Girón

Giménez

Hedilla

Lescat

Ledesma

Lira

Luca

Morales

Nguema

d'Ors

Perales

Peralta

Piñar

P. Primo de Rivera

Redondo

Ridruejo

Rosales

Ruiz de Alda

Sánchez

Soriano

Únzaga

Zóbel


Literature

Arriba

Cara al Sol

La Conquista del Estado

La Gaceta Literaria

Twenty-Six Points


Outside Spain

Latin America

Philippines

 Parties 

Bolivian Socialist Falange

Falanga National Radical Camp

National Falange

Phalange Française

Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party


Related topics

Kataeb Party

Francoism

Fascist symbolism

Nacionalismo



 Politics portal

 Spain portal

v
t
e

He espoused an elitist understanding of politics,[57] influenced by the ideas of Ortega y Gasset.[58] His political thought evolved as he progressively radicalized into a more anti-conservative direction.[57] Primo de Rivera put much faith on corporatism, one of the few early Falangist tenets framed in positive terms, adopted from Italian Fascism.[59]


Regarding political violence, he early alluded to what he famously termed as the "dialectics of fists and guns", already stating during the Falange foundation event at the Teatro de la Comedia, that in order to fulfill the desired cultural and historical regeneration of Spain, "if this has to be achieved through violence, we shall not be stopped by violence".[60][61] Willing to offer an alternative to the most basic fundamentals behind liberal democracy, he also non-accidentally addressed some words of scorn to "that terrible man who was called Juan Jacobo Rousseau [sic]" during the foundational meeting of the Falange.[62]


Like other Falangists, Primo de Rivera partially embraced the sense of Castilianist essentialism from the Generation of '98, but, conversely, he was also distinctly aware of the cultural plurality of the peoples in Spain, and thus the Falangist national project for Spain was framed following the orteguian legacy as one of "unity of destiny in the universal".[63] It has been noted that at some point he benignly put his hopes on politicians far from his own fascist stances such as republican Manuel Azaña (in this case for a very brief time) or socialist Indalecio Prieto as potential candidates to alleviate his self-imposed burden for "saving" the country.[57]


According to Álvarez Chillida, Primo de Rivera's written works did not feature a marked antisemitism when compared to other Falangist leaders.[n. 1] Writing on the stridency of Primo de Rivera's personal views compared to his endorsement of antisemitic violence, historian Paul Preston wrote "If he was not actively anti-Semitic, he shared the belief of the more conservative advocates that it was legitimate to annihilate the Jewish-masonic-Bolshevik conspiracy by violence."[25]


Though Falangism marks resemblance to Italian Fascism, Primo de Rivera was openly critical of fascism which leaves the subject of whether or not he was fascist in great debate.[64]







Genealogy[edit]

Ancestors of José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia[65]

       8. José Primo de Rivera y Ortiz de Pinedo [es]
  
  
 
 4. Miguel Primo de Rivera y Sobremonte 
  
    
 
 9. Juana Sobremonte y Larrazábal
  
  
 
 2. Miguel Primo de Rivera y Orbaneja 
  
      
 
 10. Sebastián Orbaneja y Pérez
  
  
 
 5. Inés Orbaneja y Pérez de Grandallana 
  
    
 
 11. Juana Pérez de Grandallana y Angulo
  
  
 
 1. José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia 
 
        
 
 12. Manuel Antonio Sáenz de Heredia y Sicilia
  
  
 
 6. Gregorio Sáenz de Heredia y Tejada 
  
    
 
 13. María Cesárea Tejada y Santa María
  
  
 
 3. Casilda Sáenz de Heredia y Suárez de Argudín 
  
      
 
 14. José Antonio Suárez-Argudín y García Barroso
  
  
 
 7. Ángela Suárez-Argudín y Ramírez de Arellano 
  
    
 
 15. María Teresa Ramírez de Arellano y Fernández de Zaliella
  
              


Notes[edit]


↑ Álvarez Chillida just found two antisemitic tics in José Antonio, namely when he once connected the "hideous darkness" he saw in Karl Marx to the later's Jewish mentality, and when in 1935 he denounced "Jewish traffickers" were profiting from the passivity of the Republic before the revolutionary threat.[58]



References[edit]

1 2 3 4 Payne 2000, p. 71.

↑ Thomàs 2019, pp. 172–173.

↑ Thomàs 2019, pp. 167, 172–173.

↑ Fantoni y Benedí 2003, pp. 529–530.

1 2 3 Greger, Nick Wolfgang Sinan; Primo de Rivera, José Antonio (2018). Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera: the Foundations of the Spanish Phalanx. o.A: KDP Publishers (Selbstverlag). ISBN 978-1-7241-5576-4.

↑ José Antonio's proficiency in English on YouTube.

↑ José Antonio's proficiency in French on YouTube.

↑ R. Gonzalo, 2009: "José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia Archived 2010-03-25 at the Wayback Machine." Blog Diario. Chapter 186.

1 2 Leoncio Jiménez Cano, 1980: "Vida castrense de José Antonio Primo de Rivera en Barcelona", El Arenal. Ávila. Ed. Antonio Álvarez Cadenas.

↑ Juan Velarde Fuertes: "José Antonio, en la Universidad[permanent dead link]." Fundación José Antonio Primo de Rivera.

↑ Preston, Paul (2023). Architects of Terror: Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Anti-Semitism in Franco's Spain. London, UK: William Collins. p. 253.

↑ Preston, Paul (2023). pp. 253, 265.

1 2 "José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia", España desde 1931.

↑ Maurel 2005, p. 149.

↑ Preston, Paul (2023). Architects of Terror: Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Anti-Semitism in Franco's Spain. London, UK: William Collins. p. 10.

↑ Jesús López Medel: "La influencia de Ortega y Gasset en José Antonio". Archived from the original on October 26, 2009. Retrieved August 29, 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link).

1 2 3 Semblanza de José Antonio Primo de Rivera.

1 2 3 Fernando Díaz-Plaja: "Discurso de José Antonio Primo de Rivera exponiendo los puntos fundamentales de Falange española, pronunciado en el Teatro de la Comedia de Madrid, el día 29 de octubre de 1933." Documentos.

↑ José Antonio: Memoria de un hombre on YouTube. Informe Semanal. November 20, 1986. Part II, minutes 0:31 to 1:08.

↑ Payne, Stanley G. Spain: A unique history. Univ of Wisconsin Press, 2011, p. 204 [ISBN missing]

↑ Thomàs, Joan Maria. José Antonio Primo de Rivera: The Reality and Myth of a Spanish Fascist Leader. Vol. 3. Berghahn Books, 2019, pp. 136, 143 [ISBN missing]

↑ "Sobre el Concepto del Estado", Obras Completas de José Antonio. Rumbos.

1 2 Álvarez Chillida 2007, p. 183.

↑ Álvarez Chillida, Antisemitismo, pp. 342–43

1 2 Preston, Paul (2023). Architects of Terror: Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Anti-Semitism in Franco's Spain. London, UK: William Collins. pp. 4-5.

↑ Sancho Dávila and Julián Pemartín, Hacia la historia de la Falange: primera contribución de Sevilla (Jerez: Jerez Industrial, 1938) pp. 24–27.

↑ Vincent 2006, pp. 142–143.

↑ Vincent 2006, pp. 141–142.

↑ César Vidal: "¿Quién redactó el "Cara al sol"?." Libertad Digital.

↑ José Antonio: Memoria de un hombre on YouTube. Informe Semanal. November 20, 1986. Part II, minutes 2:08 to 2:28.

↑ Manuel Álvarez Tardío, Roberto Villa García, 1936, fraude y violencia en las elecciones del Frente Popular, Barcelona 2017, ISBN 9788467049466, p. 148

↑ Álvarez Tardío, Villa García 2017, pp. 580-599

↑ Álvarez Tardío, Villa García 2017, pp. 498-500

↑ Ángel Luis López Villaverde, Las botas sobre los votos. Las elecciones en Cuenca como decantador del liderazgo de la trama golpista de 1936, [in:] Alcores 24 (2020), p. 296

↑ "YouTube". YouTube.

↑ Carr, Raymond (1980). Modern Spain 1875-1980. Oxford University Press. p. 133. ISBN 0 19 215828 7.

↑ Payne, Stanley G. (1961). p. 102.

↑ Payne, Stanley G. (1961). p. 142.

↑ "Interrogatorio de José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Saénz de Heredia, en el proceso celebrado en Alicante, el 16 de Noviembre de 1936", Obras Completas de José Antonio. Rumbos.

↑ "El fusilamiento de José Antonio". YouTube. May 11, 2017.

↑ "José Antonio Primo de Rivera y Falange Española." Turismo y Arte.

↑ Eduardo Palomar Baró: "José Antonio visto por Ramón Serrano Suñer", Generalísimo Francisco Franco.

↑ Gustavo Morales, 2007: "Falangistas en la oposición." XI Universidad de Verano, September 2007. Madrid.

↑ Elizabeth Bibesco, The Romantic, William Heinemann, London, 1940. See: Tereixa Constenla, El Pais, Madrid, October 1, 2015; James Badcock and Gordon Rayner, The Telegraph, London, October 2, 2015

↑ Floren Dimas, 2003: "El papel de la Falange en la represión franquista", Artículos y Documentos. Foro por la Memoria.

↑ "Manuel Hedilla Larrey." Biografías y Vidas.

↑ Diccionario de la Guerra Civil Española Archived 2009-09-16 at the Wayback Machine. Rojo y Azul.

↑ Thomàs, Joan Maria. José Antonio Primo de Rivera: The Reality and Myth of a Spanish Fascist Leader. Vol. 3. Berghahn Books, 2019, p. 317 [ISBN missing]

↑ Agencias. ""El Caídos por Dios y por la patria seguirá presente en Pedro Bernardo." Diario Público. Madrid. June 24, 2009.

↑ 'El Ayuntamiento de Guadalajara retiró esta madrugada las estatuas de Franco y José Antonio que había en la ciudad Archived 2009-09-26 at the Wayback Machine." Lukor. March 23, 2005.

↑ Carriage of José-Antonio's corpse from Alicante to the monastery of El Escorial (Part I, in Spanish) on YouTube.

↑ Carriage of José-Antonio's corpse from Alicante to the monastery of El Escorial (Part II) on YouTube.

↑ Payne, Stanley G., and Jesús Palacios. Franco: A personal and political biography. University of Wisconsin Press, 2014, p. 218 [ISBN missing]

↑ Falange. Reburial of José-Antonio at the Valley of the Fallen in 1959 on YouTube.

↑ "La familia de José Antonio Primo de Rivera pide su exhumación del Valle de los Caídos" (in Spanish). 2022.

↑ Jones, Sam (April 23, 2023). "Body of Spain's fascist party founder to be removed from basilica". The Guardian.

1 2 3 Thomàs 2019, p. 172.

1 2 Álvarez Chillida 2002, p. 342.

↑ Sesma Landrin 2012, p. 59.

↑ Rodrigo 2013, p. 151.

↑ Ranzato 2006, p. 192.

↑ Sesma Landrin 2012, p. 58.

↑ Saz 2008, p. 160.

↑ Payne, Stanley G. (February 7, 2017). "Spain's "Semi-Fascism"". Slate. ISSN 1091-2339. Retrieved September 5, 2025.

↑ Cadenas y Vicent 1955, pp. 598, 597, 607, 608.



Bibliography[edit]

Álvarez Chillida, Gonzalo (2002). El antisemitismo en España: la imagen del judío, 1812–2002. Madrid: Marcial Pons Historia. ISBN 84-95379-44-9.

Álvarez Chillida, Gonzalo (2007). "La eclosión del antisemitismo español: de la II República al Holocausto". In Gonzalo Álvarez Chillida and Ricardo Izquierdo Benito (ed.). El antisemitismo en España. Cuenca: Ediciones de la Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha. pp. 181–206. ISBN 978-84-8427-471-1.

Cadenas y Vicent, Vicente de (1955). "El marquesado de Estella, el condado de San Fernando de la Unión y el ducado de Primo de Rivera". Hidalguía. 3 (12). Madrid: 593–614.

Fantoni y Benedí, Rafael (2003). "Los Benedit. Infanzones de Aragón y sus descendientes, Títulos del Reino, Grandes de España" (PDF). Hidalguía (298–299): 513–537. ISSN 0018-1285.

Maurel, Marcos (2005). "Un asunto de fe. Fascismo en España (1933–1936)". In Ferran Gallego & Francisco Morente (ed.). Fascismo en España: ensayos sobre los orígenes sociales y culturales del franquismo. El Viejo Topo. pp. 133–162. ISBN 84-96356-32-9.

Payne, Stanley G. (1961) Falange. A History of Spanish Fascism. Stanford University Press

Preston, Paul (2023). Architects of Terror: Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Anti-Semitism in Franco's Spain. London, UK: William Collins. ISBN 978-0-00-852212-4.

Ranzato, Gabriele (2006). El eclipse de la democracia: la Guerra Civil española y sus orígenes, 1931–1939. (translated by Javier Borrajo). Siglo XXI de España Editores.

Rodrigo, Javier (2013). "A este lado del bisturí. Guerra, fascistización y cultura falangista". In Miguel Angel Ruiz Carnicer (ed.). Falange, las culturas políticas del fascismo en la España de Franco (1936–1975) (PDF). Vol. 1. Zaragoza: Institución Fernando el Católico. pp. 143–167. ISBN 978-84-9911-216-9.

Saz, Ismael (2008). "Las culturas de los nacionalismos franquistas". Ayer (71): 153–174. JSTOR 41325981.

Sesma Landrin, Nicolás (2012). "La dialéctica de los puños y de las pistolas. Una aproximación a la formación de la idea de estado en el fascismo español (1931–1945)" (PDF). Historia y Política (27). Madrid: CEPC; UCM; UNED: 51–82. ISSN 1575-0361.

Thomas, Hugh. "The Hero in the Empty Room: Jose Antonio and Spanish Fascism," Journal of Contemporary History (1966) 1#1 pp. 174–182 JSTOR 259655

Thomàs, Joan Maria (2019). "José Antonio Primo de Rivera y el Frente Popular". Historia y Política (41). Madrid: CEPC; UCM; UNED: 153–174. doi:10.18042/hp.41.06. ISSN 1575-0361.

Velarde Fuertes, Juan. "José Antonio y la economía" Grafite ediciones. ISBN 84-96281-10-8

Vincent, Mary (2006). "La reafirmación de la masculinidad en la cruzada franquista". Cuadernos de historia contemporánea. 28 (28). Universidad Complutense de Madrid: 135–151. ISSN 0214-400X.

Payne, Stanley G. (2000). Fascism in Spain, 1923–77. University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-02991-6564-2


External links[edit]

Newspaper clippings about José Antonio Primo de Rivera in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW





Party political offices



New creation
 Leader of the Falange Española de las JONS 1934–1936
Succeeded byManuel Hedilla




Spanish nobility



Preceded byMiguel Primo de Rivera y Orbaneja
 Marquis of Estella 1930–1936
Succeeded byMiguel Primo de Rivera y Sáenz de Heredia




New creation
 Duke of Primo de Rivera 1948(posthumous)




v
t
eFascism

Core tenets

Actual idealism

Aestheticization of politics

Anti-communism

Anti-materialism

Anti-pacifism

Authoritarianism

Chauvinism

Class collaboration

Conspiracism

Corporatism

Cult of personality

Dictatorship

Direct action

Dirigisme

Economic interventionism

Eugenics

Heroic capitalism

Heroic realism

Heroism

Imperialism

Indoctrination

Irrationalism

Machismo

Masculinity

Militarism

National syndicalism

Nationalism

Integral

Palingenetic

Ultra

New Man

One-party state

Perpetual war

Populism

Proletarian nation

Propaganda

Racism

Reactionary modernism

Social Darwinism

Social interventionism

Social order

State capitalism

Statolatry

Supercapitalism

Syncretism

Third Position

Totalitarianism

Topics

Definitions

Economics

Fascism and ideology

Fascism worldwide

Symbolism

Lists

British fascist parties

Fascist movements by country (A–F

G–M

N–T

U–Z)

Secretaries of Italian fascist parties

Related

Anti-fascism

Criticism of fascism

Fascist (epithet)

Fascist mysticism

Feudal fascism

Morenazi

Para-/semi-fascism

Post-fascism

Proto-fascism

Red fascism

Red–green–brown alliance

Roman salute

Sansepolcrismo

Social fascism

Sorelianism

Synarchism


Variants


Arab

Argentine

Nacionalismo

Austrian

Brazilian

British

Christian

Christian Identity

Mexican synarchism

Clerical

Crypto

Eco

English

Falangism

French

Doriotism

Pétainism

Neo-Pétainism

Jeune Nation

L'Œuvre Française

Valoisism

Hindu

Hungarian

Hutu

Ilminism

Irish

Islamic

Ziaism

Israeli/Zionist

Revisionist Maximalism

Italian

Intransigent

Japanese

Emperor-system

Statism

Restoration

Ultra

Techno

Korean

Latvian

Mystical

Nazism

Austrian

Esoteric

Hitlerism

Neo-Nazism

Russian

Strasserism

Swedish

Neo

Finnish

NRx

Pan-Turkic

Rexism

Polish

Romanian

Legionarism

Neo-Legionarism

Romanianism/Stelism

Russian

Neo-Eurasianism

Syndicalist

Syrian Social Nationalism

Third Positionism

National-anarchism

National Bolshevism

Nazi-Maoism

Uruguayan

Sosism

Ustašism


Movements

Africa

Coalition for the Defence of the Republic

Greyshirts

Muslim Association of the Lictor

National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Ossewabrandwag

Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines

Republican Democratic Movement

Young Egypt Party (1933)

Asia

Abhinav Bharat

Al-Muthanna Club

Aria Party

Azerbaijan National Democrat Party

Azure Party

Black Dragon Society

Brit HaBirionim

Concordia Association

Grey Wolves

Golden Square

Hindu Mahasabha

Iran-e-No Party

Kach

Kataeb Party

Kenkokukai

Kokumin Dōmei

Korea Nationalist Party

Korean National Youth Association

Lehi

Liberal Party (South Korea)

Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf

National Socialism Association

Nationalist Movement Party

National Will Party

Nation Party of Iran

Otzma Yehudit

Pan-Iranist Party

Palestine Arab Party

Progress Party (Iran)

Philippine Falange

Rastakhiz Party

Rastriya Prajatantra Party

Reform bureaucrats

Religious Zionist Party

Sakurakai

Sangh Parivar

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad

Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal

Bharatiya Janata Party

Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha

Bharatiya Jana Sangh

Bharatiya Kisan Sangh

Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh

Bharat Vikas Parishad

Ekal Vidyalaya

Hindu Makkal Katchi

Hindu Munnani

Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh

Jammu Praja Parishad

Muslim Rashtriya Manch

Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas

Rashtra Sevika Samiti

Rashtriya Sikh Sangat

Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh

Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana

Seva Bharati

Vidya Bharati

Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram

Vishva Hindu Parishad

Bajrang Dal

Durga Vahini

SUMKA

Syrian Social Nationalist Party

Tōhōkai

Tsagaan Khas

Turkish Union Party

Wang Jingwei Kuomintang

Northern / Northwestern Europe

Academic Karelia Society

Ailtirí na hAiséirghe

Autonome Nationalisten

Bases Autónomas

Black Front (Netherlands)

Blueshirts

Breton Social-National Workers' Movement

British Democratic Party

British Fascists

Britain First

British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women

British Movement

British National Party (1960)

British National Party

British People's Party (1939)

British People's Party (2005)

British Union of Fascists

The Britons

La Cagoule

Casuals United

Centre Party '86

Clerical People's Party

Dutch Defence League

Dutch Fascist Union

English Defence League

European Defence League

English National Association

Le Faisceau

Fédération d'action nationale et européenne

Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation

Finnish People's Organisation

Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party

Flemish National Union

French National-Collectivist Party

French Nationalist Party

French Popular Party

General Dutch Fascist League

Greater Britain Movement

Groupe Collaboration

Heathen Front

Imperial Fascist League

International Third Position

Jeune Nation

Lalli Alliance of Finland

Lapua Movement

League of Saint George

Les Identitaires

Mouvement d'Action Civique

Mouvement Franciste

Nasjonal Samling

National Alliance (Sweden)

National Corporate Party

National Fascisti

National Front (UK)

National League of Sweden

Nationalist Party

National Popular Rally

National Rally

National Syndicalists

National Union (Netherlands)

National Union (Portugal)

New Party

Nipsters

Nordic League

Nordic Resistance Movement

Northern League

Norwegian Defence League

Nouvelle Droite

L'Œuvre Française

Official National Front

Order of Flemish Militants

Organisation of National Socialists

Parti Communautaire National-Européen

Party of Finnish Labor

Party of the Swedes

Patriotic Alternative

Patriotic People's Movement

Patriotic People's Movement (1993)

Pērkonkrusts

Phalange Française

Ragnarock

Rebelles Européens

Rexist Party

Rising Finland

Scottish Democratic Fascist Party

Scottish Protestant League

Skrewdriver

Skullhead

Stormers

Terre et Peuple

Third Way (France)

Third Way (UK)

Union Movement

Verdinaso

Vigrid

White Aryan Resistance

Central Europe

Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists

Arrow Cross Party

Artgemeinschaft

Austrian Nazism

Black Front (Germany)

Bund Deutscher Osten

Christian National Socialist Front

Deutsche Reichspartei

Eidgenössische Sammlung

Falanga

Free German Workers' Party

German Faith Movement

German National Movement in Liechtenstein

German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia)

German Party (Slovakia)

German Social Union

Honor

Hungarian National Front

Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party

Hungarian National Socialist Party

Combat League of German Socialists

Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia

Landser

Liechtenstein Homeland Service

National Democratic Party (Austria)

National Democratic Party of Germany

National Fascist Community

National Front (Hungary)

National Front (Switzerland)

National Movement of Switzerland

National Radical Camp

National Radical Camp (1993)

National Revival of Poland

National Union (Switzerland)

Nationalist Front (Germany)

Nazi Party

Greater German People's Community

Nazi Germany

National Socialist Freedom Movement

National Socialist Working Association

New Order

Nipsters

No Colours Records

PC Records

Positive Christianity

German Christians

Republic Movement

The Right (Germany)

Rock-O-Rama Records

Shield and Sword

Slovak People's Party

Socialist Reich Party

Stahlgewitter

Sudeten German Party

Szeged Idea

The Third Path

United Hungarian National Socialist Party

Vlajka

Völkisch movement

Volksdeutsche Bewegung

Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit

Wiking-Jugend

Southern Europe

ADÑ–Spanish Identity

Albanian Fascist Party

Balli Kombëtar

Brothers of Italy

CEDADE

Democratic Fascist Party

European Nation State

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Fasci Italiani di Combattimento

Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Falange

Sección Femenina

La Falange (1999)

Falange Auténtica

Falange Española

Falange Española Auténtica

Falange Española de las JONS

Falange Española de las JONS (1976)

Falange Española Independiente

Falangist Movement of Spain

Freethinkers' Party

Imperium Europa

Italian fascism

National Fascist Party (Italy)

Italian Social Republic

Republican Fascist Party

Italian Social Movement

Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista

Juntas Españolas

National Alliance (Spain)

National Alliance July 18

National Democracy (Italy)

National Democracy (Spain)

National Front (Spain, 1986)

National Front (Spain, 2006)

National Future

National Union (Italy, 1923)

National Union (Spain)

New Force (Italy)

New Force (Spain)

Republican Social Movement

The Right (Italy)

Sammarinese Fascist Party

Spanish Military Union

Struggle of the People

Student Action

Terza Posizione

Tricolour Flame

Unidad Falangista Montañesa

Youth Front

Eastern and Southeastern Europe

Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights

Bosnian Movement of National Pride

Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party

Croatian Liberation Movement

Croatian National Resistance

Croatian Party of Rights

Crusade of Romanianism

ELAM (Cyprus)

Ethnic National Union

Eurasia Movement

Eurasia Party

Format18

For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action

German Party

German People's Party

Golden Dawn

Greek National Socialist Party

Hosank

Iron Guard

Kolovrat

LEPEN

Liberal Democratic Party of Russia

Lithuanian Nationalist Union

National Agrarian Party

National Bolshevik Front

National Bolshevik Party

National-Christian Defense League

National Christian Party

National Fascist Movement

National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement

National Party – Greeks

National Socialist Patriotic Organisation

National Socialist Society

National Social Movement

National Romanian Fascio

National Renaissance Front

National Salvation Front

Nokturnal Mortum

Obraz

Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists

Pamyat

Patriotic Alliance

People's Party

Ratniks (Bulgaria)

Romanian Front

Russian Imperial Movement

Russian Fascist Party

Russian Women's Fascist Movement

Serbian Action

Serbian Radical Party

Steel Shield

Svoboda

Union of Bulgarian National Legions

Ustaše

Ustaše in Australia

Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood

Yugoslav Radical Union

ZBOR

North America

Fascism in Canada

Aryan Guard

Canadian Association for Free Expression

Canadian Union of Fascists

Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform

Heritage Front

Parti national social chrétien

Fascism in the United States

American Front

American Nazi Party

Fascist League of North America

Identity Evropa

League of the South

National Unity Party of Canada

Nationalist Social Club-131

Nationalist Front (United States)

Patriot Front

Proud Boys

Rise Above Movement

Silver Legion of America

Christian Party (United States, 1930s)

Traditionalist Worker Party

Trumpism

Donald Trump and fascism

Vanguard America

Volksfront

Revolutionary Mexicanist Action

Mexican Democratic Party

Mexican Fascist Party

National Pro Patria Party

National Synarchist Union

Nationalist Front of Mexico

Oceania

Action Zealandia

Antipodean Resistance

Australia First Movement

Australia First Party

Australian Defence League

Australian National Socialist Party

Centre Party

Lads Society

National Action (Australia)

National Socialist Network

National Socialist Party of Australia

Progressive Nationalist Party

Reclaim Australia

True Blue Crew

United Patriots Front

South America

Agrarian Labor Party

Argentine Anticommunist Alliance

Argentine Fascist Party

Argentine Nationalist Action

Argentine Patriotic League

Bolivian Socialist Falange

Bolsonarism

Brazilian Integralism

Brazilian Integralist Action

Brazilian Integralist Front

Falangism in Latin America

Iron Guard (Argentina)

Nacionalismo

National Fascist Party (Argentina)

National Fascist Union

Nationalist Liberation Alliance

National Liberation Movement

National Socialist Movement of Chile

National Universitary Concentration

New Triumph Party

Patriot Front (Argentina)

Popular Dignity

Popular Freedom Alliance

Popular Representation Party

Popular Socialist Vanguard

Republican League

La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia

Revolutionary Union

Tacuara Nationalist Movement


People

Australia

Campbell (Eric)

Campbell (Graeme)

Cottrell

Groot

Mills

Saleam

Austria

Dollfuss

Miklas

Pfrimer

Planetta

Schuschnigg

Seyss-Inquart

Starhemberg

Belgium

Daye

Declercq

Degrelle

Denis

Elias

Eriksson

Hermans

Lagrou

Poulet

Severen

Streel

van de Wiele

Croatia

Boban

Francetić

Kraljević

Kvaternik

Luburić

Pavelić

Pavičić

Rover

Servatzy

Finland

Helanen

Isotalo

Kalsta

Konkka

Kosola

Orko

Simojoki

Somersalo

Törni

Varjonen

France

Augier

Bardèche

Benoist-Méchin

Béraud

Brasillach

Bucard

Châteaubriant

Déat

Déroulède

Dior

Doriot

La Rochelle

Lagardelle

Laval

Pétain

Rebatet

Valois

Vial

Germany

Abetz

Andrae

Baeumler

Berchtold

Berger

Best

Brunner

Bühler

Darré

Falkenhausen

Hocke

Feder

Forster

Frank

Franz V

Gesche

Goebbels

Göring

Graf

Greiser

Günther

Hanke

Heiden

Hess

Heydrich

Himmler

Hitler

Klintzsch

Kuhn

Ludendorff

Maurice

Müller

Niekisch

Ploetz

Rahn

Reitsch

Renthe-Fink

Ribbentrop

Rieger

Rosenberg

Schmitt

Schreck

Skorzeny

Strasser (Gregor)

Strasser (Otto)

Streicher

Terboven

Thadden

Krosigk

Zündel

Greece

Dragoumis

Kasidiaris

Koryzis

Lagos

Michaloliakos

Papadopoulos

India

Adityanath

Advani

Bose

Godse

Golwalkar

Hedgewar

Mukherjee

Savarkar

Vajpayee

Iran

Forouhar

Kashani

Monshizadeh

Pezeshkpour

Teymourtash

Israel

Ahimeir

Ben-Ari

Ben-Gvir

Eldad

Eliyahu

Goldstein

Gopstein

Ha'ivri

Kahane

Marzel

Natan-Zada

Italy

Acerbo

Alfieri

Ambris

D'Annunzio

Azara

Badoglio

Balbo

Torrente Ballester

Bastianini

Bianchi

Boni

Bono

Boselli

Bottai

Ciano (Costanzo)

Ciano (Galeazzo)

Cogni

Corradini

Freda

Gentile

Giuriati

Gozi

Grandi

Graziani

Guidi

Malaparte

Marinetti

Michels

Morgagni

Mussolini

Olivetti

Panunzio

Papini

Pavolini

Rauti

Ricci

Ridruejo

Rocco

Rossoni

Sarfatti

Soffici

Spirito

Volpi

Japan

Akao

Araki

Chō

Hashimoto

Honjō

Kita

Kodama

Matsuoka

Nakano

Nonaka

Ōkawa

Sasakawa

Romania

Antonescu

Bacaloglu

Codreanu

Crainic

Cuza

Gigurtu

Goga

Manoilescu

Moța

Ogoranu

Sima

Russia

Astroŭski

Borovikov

Ilyin

Kaminski

Martsinkevich

Milchakov

Oktan

Rodzaevsky

Spain

Arrese

Bau Nolla

Bilbao Eguía

Carrero Blanco

Fernández-Cuesta

Franco

Franco y Polo

Giménez Caballero

Primo de Rivera

Ramos

Sánchez Mazas

Serrano Suñer

Ukraine

Dontsov

Klyachkivsky

Lebed

Samchuk

Shukhevych

Stetsko

Tyahnybok

United Kingdom

Beckett

Chamberlain

Chesterton

Lake

Leese

Mosley (Diana)

Mosley (Oswald)

Pankhurst

Pearson

Ramsay

Robinson

Southgate

Tyndall

Vaughan-Henry

Wellesley

United States

Auernheimer

Collins

Fuentes

Joyce

Pelley

Pound

Yockey

Other

Celmiņš

Martínez

Perón

Quisling

Ramírez

Riva-Agüero y Osma

Šešelj

Szálasi

Yeivin


Works

Literature

1776 Returns

La Conquista del Estado

The Culture of Critique

Defiance

The Doctrine of Fascism

Essentials of Hindutva

Fascist Manifesto

For My Legionaries

The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia

The Fourth Political Theory

Hitlers Zweites Buch

Hutu Ten Commandments

Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics

An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus

Kokutairon and Pure Socialism

The Last Will of a Russian Fascist

Manifesto of Race

Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals

Mein Kampf

My Autobiography

My Life

The Myth of the Twentieth Century

OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World

Protestantische Rompilger

A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century

Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews

A Warning to the Hindus

Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals

Action

Ajan Suunta

L'Alba

El Alcázar

The American Review

Der Angriff

Arriba

The Blackshirt

La Conquista del Estado

Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung

Das Deutsche Mädel

La Difesa della Razza

Eleftheros Kosmos

The European

Fashist

Fashizmi

La France au travail

Fritt Folk

Fronten

Gândirea

Gioventù Fascista

Golden Dawn

Hamaas

Hrvatski Domobran

Je suis partout

Kangura

Kansallissosialisti

Kesari

Limonka

Masada2000

Münchener Beobachter

Nash Put'

Nástup

Nation Europa

Neue Anthropologie

Neues Volk

Het Nieuwe Volk

Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift

Novopress

Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift

Organiser

Panchjanya

Panzerbär

Parole der Woche

Le Pays Réel

Der Pimpf

Il Popolo d'Italia

Das Reich

Revue d'histoire du fascisme

Das Schwarze Korps

Sfarmă-Piatră

Signal

Siniristi

Spearhead

Der Stürmer

Türkische Post

Der Umbruch

Vairas

Vlajka

Volk en Staat

Völkischer Beobachter

Die Wehrmacht

Wochenspruch der NSDAP

Film

L'Armata Azzurra

Bengasi

Condottieri

The Daughter of the Samurai

Erbkrank

Europa: The Last Battle

The Great Appeal

The Old Guard

Raza

Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal

Der Sieg des Glaubens

The Siege of the Alcazar

Lo squadrone bianco

Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht

Triumph of the Will

Music

Fashwave

Hindutva pop

National Socialist black metal

Nazi punk

Rock Against Communism

Other

Allach

StoneToss

Related topics

Art of the Third Reich

Fascist architecture

Heroic realism

Nazi architecture

Nazism and cinema


History



pre-1922

1922–1945

1945–present

1900s

Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust

1910s

Arditi

Fascio

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Armenian genocide and the Holocaust

1920s

March on Rome

Corfu incident

Acerbo Law

Beer Hall Putsch

Aventine Secession

Italian economic battles

Le Faisceau

28 May 1926 coup d'état

Libyan genocide

1930s

March of the Iron Will

November 1932 German federal election

March 1933 German federal election

Enabling Act

Austrian Civil War

July Putsch

1934 Montreux Fascist conference

Romani Holocaust

4th of August Regime

Anti-Comintern Pact

Spanish Civil War

1940s

World War II

Nazi crimes against the Polish nation

The Holocaust

Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia

End in Italy

Nuremberg Trials

Tokyo Trials



Category

Portals:
 Biography
 Law
 Politics
 Spain

Authority control databases 
International
ISNI
VIAF
GND
FAST
WorldCat
National
United States
France
BnF data
Italy
Czech Republic
Spain
Portugal
Netherlands
Norway
Greece
Sweden
Poland
Vatican
Israel
Catalonia
Croatia
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
Discography of American Historical Recordings
People
Trove
Deutsche Biographie
DDB
Other
IdRef
Open Library
SNAC
Yale LUX









































Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=José_Antonio_Primo_de_Rivera&oldid=1378205653"
					Categories: 
1903 births
1936 deaths
20th-century Spanish lawyers
20th-century Spanish male journalists
20th-century Spanish poets
20th-century Spanish male poets
Acción Española
Dukes of Spain
Executed politicians
Executed Spanish people
Executed writers
Falangist politicians
Grandees of Spain
Leaders of political parties in Spain
Marquesses of Spain
Members of the Congress of Deputies (Spain)
Members of the Congress of Deputies of the Second Spanish Republic
National syndicalists
Palmarian saints
People convicted of seditious conspiracy
People executed by Spain by firing squad
People from Madrid
People killed by the Second Spanish Republic
Primo de Rivera family
Spanish Falangists
Spanish newspaper founders
Spanish people of the Spanish Civil War (National faction)
Spanish revolutionaries
Spanish Roman Catholic writers
Spanish syndicalistsHidden categories: 
Articles with short description
Short description matches Wikidata
Use mdy dates from July 2019
Webarchive template wayback links
Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2019
All articles with dead external links
Articles with dead external links from April 2017
Articles with permanently dead external links
CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown
All articles lacking reliable references
Articles lacking reliable references from March 2020
Pages with missing ISBNs
All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases
Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2025
CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)
				
			
			
		
		
			
				
	
 This page was last edited on 3 October 2026, at 13:42 (UTC).
	
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
	
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


				
	
Privacy policy
	
About Wikipedia
	
Disclaimers
	
Contact Wikipedia
	
Legal & safety contacts
	
Code of Conduct
	
Developers
	
Statistics
	
Cookie statement
	
Mobile view


				
	

	



			
		
	 
 

	
		
			
				

Search
			
		
			
		
			
				
					
						
							
								
								
							
							
						
						Search
					
				
			
		
		
				
						
					
						
						

Toggle the table of contents
						
						
					
						
						
					
						
					
			
				José Antonio Primo de Rivera
			
		
		
			
				


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
		
			
				

46 languages
			
			

Add topic
			
		
			
				
				
			
		
	


	
		
	




