



Internet History Sourcebooks: Modern History


































  

    
Home | Ancient  History Sourcebook | Medieval Sourcebook |  Modern History Sourcebook | Byzantine  Studies Page
     Other History Sourcebooks: African | East Asian | Indian | Islamic | Jewish |  Lesbian and Gay | Science | Women's | Global
  
  

  
  

    
    
      

        

            
            
			IHSP			
            Modern History



Full Texts
Multimedia
Search
Help

Selected Sources Sections
Studying History
Reformation
Early Modern World
Everyday Life
Absolutism
Constitutionalism
Colonial North America
Colonial Latin America
Scientific Revolution
Enlightenment
Enlightened Despots
American Independence
French Revolution
Industrial Revolution
Romanticism
Conservative Order
Nationalism
Liberalism
1848 Revolutions
19C Britain
British Empire History
19C France
19C Germany
19C Italy
19C West Europe
19C East Europe
Early US
US Civil War
US Immigration
19C US Culture
Canada
Australia & New Zealand
19C Latin America
Socialism
Imperialism
Industrial Revolution II
Darwin, Freud, Einstein
19C Religion
World War I
Russian Revolution
Age of Anxiety
Depression
Fascism
Nazism
Holocaust
World War II
Bipolar World
US Power
US Society
Western Europe Since 1945
Eastern Europe Since 1945
Decolonization
Asia Since 1900
Africa Since 1945
Middle East Since 1945
20C Latin America
Modern Social Movements
Post War Western Thought
Religion Since 1945
Modern Science
Pop Culture
21st Century

IHSP Credits


      
    
       
    
      

        
          Modern History Sourcebook: 
Joseph DeMaistre: 
The Divine Origins of Constitutions, 1810          
          

 Although Liberalism dominated in the 19th century, conservatism
  also had its theorists. The French nobleman Joseph de Maistre
  (1754-1821) emphasized the importance of religious ideas for the
  philosophy and politics of conservatism. In this essay, de Maistre
  addresses the question of constitutions; in 1819, in another essay,
  he insists on the role of the pope in preserving international
  stability.
 

 From Joseph de Maistre. Essay on the Generative Principle
  of Political Constitutions (1810)
 

 The more we examine the influence of human agency in the formation
  of political constitutions, the greater will be our conviction
  that it enters there only in a manner infinitely subordinate,
  or as a simple instrument; and I do not believe there remains
  the least doubt of the incontestable truth of the following propositions:
  - 

 1. That the fundamental principles of political constitutions
  exist before all written law. 

 2. That a constitutional law is, and can only be, the development
  or sanction of an unwritten pre-existing right. 

 3. That which is most essential, most intrinsically constitutional,
  and truly fundamental, is never written, and could not be, without
  endangering the state. 

 4. That the weakness and fragility of a constitution are actually
  in direct proportion to the multiplicity of written constitutional
  articles. 


  
        . . .
    
  


 To this general rule, that no constitution can be made or written,
  à priori, we know of but one single exception; that
  is, the legislation of Moses. This alone was cast, so to
  speak, like a statue, and written out, even to its minutest details,
  by a wonderful man, who said, Fiat! without his work ever having
  need of being corrected, improved, or in any way modified, by
  himself or others. This, alone, has set time at defiance, because
  it owed nothing to time, and expected nothing from it; this alone
  has lived fifteen hundred years; and even after eighteen new centuries
  have passed over it, since the great anathema which smote it on
  the fated day, we see it, enjoying, if I may say so, a second
  life, binding still, by I know not what mysterious bond, which
  has no human name, the different families of a people, which remain
  dispersed without being disunited. So that, like attraction, and
  by the same power, it acts at a distance, and makes one whole,
  of many parts widely separated from each other. Thus, this legislation
  lies evidently, for every intelligent conscience, beyond the circle
  traced around human power; and this magnificent exception to a
  general law, which has only yielded once, and yielded only to
  its Author, alone demonstrates the Divine mission of the great
  Hebrew Lawgiver.... 

 But, since every constitution is divine in its principle, it follows,
  that man can do nothing in this way, unless he reposes himself
  upon God, whose instrument he then becomes. Now, this is a truth,
  to which the whole human race in a body have ever rendered the
  most signal testimony. Examine history, which is experimental
  politics, and we shall there invariably find the cradle of nations
  surrounded by priests, and the Divinity constantly invoked to
  the aid of human weakness.... 

 Man in relation with his Creator is sublime, and his action is
  creative: on the contrary, so soon as he separates himself from
  God, and acts alone, he does not cease to be powerful, for this
  is a privilege of his nature; but his action is negative, and
  tends only to destroy.... 

 There is not in the history of all ages a single fact which contradicts
  these maxims. No human institution can endure unless supported
  by the Hand which supports all; that is to say, if it is not especially
  consecrated to Him at its origin. The more it is penetrated with
  the Divine principle, the more durable it will be.
  


 From M. Le Comte Joseph de Maistre, Essay on the Generative
  Principle of Political Constitutions (Boston: Little, Brown,
  1847), pp. 41-42, 93-95, 129-130,
  



 This text is part of the Internet Modern History Sourcebook.
  The Sourcebook is a collection of public domain and copy-permitted
  texts for introductory level classes in modern European and World
  history. 

 Unless otherwise indicated the specific electronic form of the
  document is copyright. Permission is granted for electronic copying,
  distribution in print form for educational purposes and personal
  use. If you do reduplicate the document, indicate the source.
  No permission is granted for commercial use of the Sourcebook. 

 (c)Paul Halsall Aug 1997 
     





The Internet History Sourcebooks Project is located at the History Department of  Fordham University, New York. The Internet
  Medieval Sourcebook, and other medieval components of the project, are located at
  the Fordham University Center
    for Medieval Studies.The IHSP recognizes the contribution of Fordham University, the
  Fordham University History Department, and the Fordham Center for Medieval Studies in
  providing web space and server support for the project. The IHSP is a project independent of Fordham University.  Although the IHSP seeks to follow all applicable copyright law, Fordham University is not
  the institutional owner, and is not liable as the result of any legal action.
  
  
    © Site Concept and Design: Paul Halsall  created 26 Jan 1996: latest revision 21 September 2026  [CV] 
  


  
      
    
  



