The Greater Britain – OswaldMosley.com                                     Skip to content       
 Oswald Mosley - Briton, Fascist, European
Home
British Fascism
United Europe
Mosley’s Policies
Bookshop
 The Greater Britain
£15.75
The publication of the first edition of ‘The Greater Britain’ coincided with the formation of the British Union of Fascists by Oswald Mosley in 1932. It provided hope and inspiration for tens of thousands of British men and women seeking an end to the Great Depression – and an alternative to communism and capitalism.
In this important book Mosley set out his plans for a new economic order – and a new system of government to implement it. This would involve Britain’s withdrawal from the chaos of world markets into a self-sufficient trading area based on Great Britain and her Empire.
It was argued that this alone could free the people from exploitation by International Finance which used cheap labour in Asia and the Far East to undercut British and Empire workers – resulting in the destruction of our major industries.
The book also outlines an alternative to ‘sham democracy’ and its replacement by a British Corporate State. Under this proposal all working people would share the profits they helped to create and they would be empowered by voting along vocational rather than 19th. Century geographic lines.
Other chapters deal with ‘The State and the Citizen’, a new concept of public service, and ‘Fascism and its Neighbours’, the new movement’s attitude towards foreign relations and defence.
Any understanding of what the Modern Movement really stood for in Great Britain is incomplete without having read ‘The Greater Britain’.
140mm x 216 mm – Gloss Laminated – 136 Pages 
 Hardback Edition
      Select if Hardback Edition required  4 £     The Greater Britain quantity  Add to basket Category: Books
   Share On Facebook 
   Tweet This Product 
   Pin This Product 
   Email This Product 
Related products
   
  Fascism For The Million  £12.00 Add to basket  Details
   
  Last Words  £14.00 Add to basket  Details
   
  Blackshirts in Geordieland  £16.00 Add to basket  Details
   
  Europe Faith and Plan  £17.25 Add to basket  Details
Home
British Fascism (1932 – 1940)
United Europe (1948 –    )
Mosley’s Policies
Articles
Mosley Supporters
Bookshop
Links
The Friends of Oswald Mosley fom@oswaldmosley.comResources
Video Clips
Sound Files
Photographs
Free Desktop BannersLibrary
18b Prisoner List
Cartoons
‘Comrade’ Archive
The European Vol 1-72Book Orders
Account details
Orders
Addresses
Lost password
All book orders processed and dispatched by the publisher:
Sanctuary Press Ltd 71-75 Shelton Street Covent Garden London WC2H 9JQ
Tel : 0844 357 9400
www.sanctuarypress.com
sales@sanctuarypress.com  Close product quick view×
Title      OswaldMosley.com is maintained and produced on behalf of the Oswald Mosley Directorate :
The Friends of Oswald Mosley (F.O.M. London)
 Email:  fom@oswaldmosley.com © COPYRIGHT -    |    F.O.M. (LONDON)   |   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED           Page load link             Go to Top  