



Oswald Mosley - Wikipedia






























Jump to content

	
		
			
				

	
	

Main menu
	
	


				
		

	
	Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Navigation
	
	
		
		
			
			
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
		
		
	


	

	
		Contribute
	
	
		
		
			
			
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Special pages
		
		
	




				

	


		
			

	
	
		
		
	


		
		
			

	

Search
	
	
		
			
				
					
						
						
					
					
				
				Search
			
		
	


			
	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	
		

	
	

Appearance
	
	


			
				
			
		
	


	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
Donate


Create account


Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	

	
	

Personal tools
	
	


		

	
		
		
			


Donate




Create account




Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	




		
	


	
		
			
		
		
			
		
			
				
				
				
		
		
	
	
				
					
					
	
	
Contents
	move to sidebar
	hide



	
		

			
				(Top)
			
		
		

		
			
				1
				Early life
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Early life subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					1.1
					Childhood and education
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					1.2
					Military service
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					1.3
					Marriage to Lady Cynthia Curzon
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				2
				Entering Westminster as a Conservative
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				3
				Crossing the floor
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				4
				Joining Labour
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Joining Labour subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					4.1
					Unsuccessfully challenging Chamberlain
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					4.2
					India and Gandhi
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					4.3
					Return to Parliament
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				5
				Office
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Office subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					5.1
					Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					5.2
					Mosley Memorandum
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				6
				New Party
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				7
				Fascism
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Fascism subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					7.1
					Marriage to Diana Mitford
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					7.2
					Involvement in fascist plot
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				8
				Internment
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				9
				Post-war politics
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				10
				Personal life
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				11
				Death and funeral
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				12
				Coat of arms
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				13
				Electoral record
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				14
				Archive and residences
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				15
				In popular culture
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle In popular culture subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					15.1
					Alternative history fiction
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					15.2
					Historical and modern-day fiction
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				16
				See also
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				17
				References
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				18
				Works cited
			
		
		
			
				
				Toggle Works cited subsection
			
		
		
			

			
				
					18.1
					Books and journals
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					18.2
					News
				
			
			
			
			
		
		

			
				
					18.3
					Websites and others
				
			
			
			
			
		
	
	
	

		
			
				19
				Further reading
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				20
				External links
			
		
		
		
		
	



					
		
			
		
		
			
				
					
						

	
	

Toggle the table of contents
	
	


							
			
		
	


					
					Oswald Mosley
			

	
	

42 languages
	
	

		
			
			
				
				
Afrikaans
العربية
مصرى
Български
Català
Čeština
Dansk
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Esperanto
Español
Euskara
فارسی
Suomi
Français
Gaeilge
עברית
Hrvatski
Հայերեն
Bahasa Indonesia
Medžuslovjansky
Italiano
日本語
ქართული
한국어
Latina
Македонски
Nederlands
Norsk bokmål
Polski
Português
Română
Русский
Simple English
Slovenščina
Svenska
Türkçe
Українська
吴语
მარგალური
粵語
中文
			
			Edit links
		

	


				
					
						
							
								

	
		
		
			
Article


Talk


			
		
		
	


								

	
	English
	
	


					

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


				
	


							
						
						
							
			    

	
		
		
			
Read


View source


View history


			
		
		
	


			

							
								

	
	

Tools
	
	


									
						

	
	Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Actions
	
	
		
		
			


Read




View source




View history


			
		
		
	



	
		General
	
	
		
		
			
			
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Switch to legacy parser
		
		
	



	
		Print/export
	
	
		
		
			
			
Download as PDF
Printable version
		
		
	



	
		In other projects
	
	
		
		
			
			
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Wikidata item
		
		
	




									
				
	


							
						
					
				
				
					
						
							
				
							
		
						
							
				
	
	Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide





							
		
					
				
				
					
							
		
		

						From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
						
						
					
					
					

British fascist politician (1896–1980)
For other people named Oswald Mosley, see Oswald Mosley (disambiguation).




The Right HonourableSir Oswald MosleyBt
Mosley, c. 1934

Leader of the British Union of Fascists[n 1]
In office1 October 1932 – 10 July 1940
Preceded byOffice established
Succeeded byOffice abolished
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
In office7 June 1929 – 19 May 1930
Prime MinisterRamsay MacDonald
Preceded byRonald McNeill
Succeeded byClement Attlee
Member of Parliament
In office21 December 1926 – 7 October 1931
Preceded byJohn Davison
Succeeded byRoy Wise
ConstituencySmethwick
In office14 December 1918 – 9 October 1924
Preceded byHarry Mallaby-Deeley
Succeeded bySir Isidore Salmon
ConstituencyHarrow


Personal details
BornOswald Ernald Mosley(1896-11-16)16 November 1896London, England
Died3 December 1980(1980-12-03) (aged 84)Orsay, Essonne, France
PartyConservative (1918–1922)Labour (1924–1931)New Party (1931–1932)British Union of Fascists (1932–1940)Union Movement(1948–1973)National Party of Europe (1962–1980)
Spouse(s)

Lady Cynthia Curzon
   ​ ​(m. 1920; died 1933)​

Hon. Diana Mitford ​(m. 1936)​
Children5, including Nicholas and Max
ParentSir Oswald Mosley, 5th Baronet
RelativesIvo Mosley (grandson)Louis Mosley (grandson)Daniel Mosley (great-grandson)
EducationWinchester CollegeRoyal Military College, Sandhurst
Military service
AllegianceBritish Empire
Branch/serviceBritish Army
Years of service1914–1918
RankLieutenant
Unit

16th The Queen's Lancers

Royal Flying Corps


Battles/wars

First World War

Second Battle of Ypres

Battle of Loos

Awards
1914–15 Star
British War Medal
Victory Medal


Part of a series on
Far-right politics inthe United Kingdom

Ideologies

British fascism

English Defence League

National Front


History

Battle of De Winton Field

Battle of Cable Street

National Front

British National Party

Battle of Lewisham

1999 London nail bombings

Question Time BNP controversy

Murder of Jo Cox

2024 riots

2025 anti-immigration protests

Operation Raise the Colours


Principles

Europe a Nation

Greater Britain

Political Soldier

Remigration

Two-tier policing conspiracy theory

White genocide conspiracy theory


Politicians

Ian Anderson

Richard Barnbrook

Derek Beackon

John Bean

John Beckett

Jack Buckby

Mark Cotterill

Richard Edmonds

Andrew Fountaine

Paul Golding

Nick Griffin

Jeffrey Hamm

Neil Francis Hawkins

Arthur Kemp

Arnold Leese

Rupert Lowe

Oswald Mosley

Archibald Maule Ramsay

John O'Brien

Brian Parker

John Kingsley Read

Nick Tenconi

Martin Webster

Paul Weston

John Graeme Wood


Activists

John Amery

Joshua Bonehill-Paine

A. K. Chesterton

Mark Collett

Ian Stuart Donaldson

Jim Dowson

Patrick Harrington

Katie Hopkins

G. S. Hutchison

Steve Laws

Rotha Lintorn-Orman

Eddy Morrison

Jack Renshaw

Tommy Robinson

Simon Sheppard

Troy Southgate

John Tyndall

Anne Marie Waters

Milo Yiannopoulos


Intellectuals

John Henry Clarke

David Irving

Jorian Jenks

John Michell

Diana Mosley

Roger Pearson

George Pitt-Rivers

Douglas Reed

Alexander Raven Thomson

Nesta Helen Webster

Henry Williamson


Active organisations

Blood & Honour

Britain First

British Democratic Party

British National Party

Combat 18

English Democrats

Great British PAC

Homeland Party

Independent Green Voice

League of Saint George

London Forum

National Action

National Front

Patriotic Alternative

Raise the Colours

Reform UK

Restore Britain

Turning Point UK

UK Independence Party


Defunct organisations

Advance UK

British Democratic Party

British Fascists

British National Party (1960)

British People's Party

1939

2005

British Union of Fascists

Column 88

English Defence League

England First Party

For Britain Movement

Greater Britain Movement

Imperial Fascist League

League of Empire Loyalists

Liberty GB

National Democrats

National Socialist Movement

1962

1997

Patriotic Party

Ultra-Tories

Union Movement

Western Goals Institute


Media

Action

The Blackshirt

Candour

The Light

Redwatch

Skrewdriver

Spearhead


Related topics

List of far-right groups (1945–present)

List of fascist parties

White power skinhead



 United Kingdom portal

 Politics portal

v
t
e


Sir Oswald Ernald Mosley, 6th Baronet (16 November 1896 – 3 December 1980), was a British far-right politician who rose to fame during the 1920s and 1930s when, disillusioned with mainstream politics, he turned to fascism. He was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Harrow from 1918 to 1924 and for Smethwick from 1926 to 1931. He founded the British Union of Fascists[n 1] (BUF) in 1932 and led it until its forced disbandment in 1940.


After military service during the First World War, Mosley became the youngest sitting member of Parliament, representing Harrow from 1918, first as a member of the Conservative Party, then an independent, and finally joining the Labour Party. At the 1924 general election he stood in Birmingham Ladywood against the future Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, coming within 100 votes of defeating him. Mosley returned to Parliament as the Labour MP for Smethwick at a by-election in 1926 and served as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in the Labour government of 1929–1931. In 1928 he succeeded his father as the sixth Mosley baronet, a title in his family for over a century. Some considered Mosley a rising star and a possible future prime minister. He resigned in 1930 over discord with the government's unemployment policies. He chose not to defend his Smethwick constituency at the 1931 general election, instead unsuccessfully standing in Stoke-on-Trent.


Mosley's New Party became the British Union of Fascists (BUF) in 1932. As its leader he publicly espoused antisemitism and sought alliances with Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler. Fascist violence under Mosley's leadership culminated in the Battle of Cable Street in 1936, during which anti-fascist demonstrators including trade unionists, liberals, socialists, communists, anarchists and British Jews prevented the BUF from marching through the East End of London. Mosley subsequently held a series of rallies around London, and the BUF increased its membership there.


In 1939 Mosley was implicated in a fascist conspiracy organised by the Right Club against the British government by Archibald Maule Ramsay.[1]


In May 1940, after the outbreak of the Second World War, Mosley was imprisoned and the BUF was made illegal. He was released in 1943 and, politically disgraced by his association with fascism, moved abroad in 1951, spending most of the remainder of his life in France and Ireland. He stood for Parliament during the post-war era but received relatively little support. During this period he was an advocate of pan-European nationalism, developing the Europe a Nation ideology, and was an early proponent of conspiracy theories concerning Holocaust denial.


Early life


Childhood and education

Oswald Ernald Mosley was born on 16 November 1896[2] at 47 Hill Street, Mayfair, London.[3] He was the eldest of the three sons of Sir Oswald Mosley, 5th Baronet (1873–1928), and Katharine Maud Edwards-Heathcote (1873–1948),[4][page needed] daughter of Captain Justinian Edwards-Heathcote, of Apedale Hall, Staffordshire;[5] they had been married the year before.[2] He had two younger brothers: Edward Heathcote Mosley (1899–1980) and John Arthur Noel Mosley (1901–1973).[5] His father was a third cousin to Claude Bowes-Lyon, 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, making Mosley a fourth cousin to Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother.


The progenitor, and earliest-attested ancestor, of the Mosley family was Ernald de Mosley (fl. 12th century), Lord of the Manor of Moseley, Staffordshire, during the reign of King John.[5][6] Nicholas Mosley was a wealthy salesman in the 16th century, and was important in the development of Manchester, before eventually becoming Lord Mayor of London; the family took a violent part in the Peterloo Massacre.[7] Two branches of the Mosley family existed – a significant cotton trading family who lived in Lancashire, and a farming family who lived in Rolleston; Oswald was descended from the former.[8] The family were prominent landholders in Staffordshire and seated at Rolleston Hall, near Burton upon Trent. Three baronetcies were created, two of which are now extinct (see Mosley baronets for further history of the family); a barony was created for Tonman Mosley, brother of the 4th Baronet, but also became extinct.[5][6] By the 19th century, reformers had taken control of the Manchester Court leet, which formerly belonged to the family, and the Mosleys had little influence by the latter half of the century.[9] Oswald's grandfather Sir Oswald Mosley, 4th Baronet, was a campaigner against Jewish emancipation.[10] Oswald noted in his autobiography My Life that he was glad to have come from an 'old English family'.[11]


His mother wrote in her diary that his birth took 18 hours after he began to arrive at 6:00am, her own mother staying by her side for the whole duration. The family doctor, Sir John Williams, gave her chloroform and the baby was delivered at 11:40pm. Her husband, who was addicted to both gambling and alcohol, wrote a large number of letters to relatives about the event, and celebrated at the Epsom Derby; he was mostly an absent husband.[11]


In childhood, Mosley moved from what he described as a "wayside house" to Rolleston Hall, which had been inherited in 1879 by the 4th Baronet. The Hall was a large building maintained by gardeners and servants.[10] Biographer Stephen Dorril has suggested that the treatment of the workers at the mansion, who laboured with no possibility to become more successful, may have impressed itself on Mosley's worldview and such treatment came to be part of his fascism.[12]


Mosley loved his mother, toward whom he felt protective; in the 1970s, he burned her diaries to avoid investigative authors depicting her negatively, using them as evidence, although he kept the entries for the first four years of his own life, and for his mother's birthday, 2 January.[13] Likewise, she celebrated Mosley and developed his ego. His father – nicknamed "Waldie" – was an amateur boxer, a Tory and a womaniser.[12] Mosley's father gained the image of a scoundrel, although Mosley did not find the description to be accurate. Nonetheless, "Waldie" acted aggressively towards his wife and child, which led to Mosley idolising his mother instead. In 1901, when Mosley was aged five and while his mother was pregnant with her third child, the couple split over his womanising – Edwards-Heathcote had discovered letters revealing that her husband was saying and giving the same things to his other lovers as to her.[14]


After Mosley's parents separated, he was raised by his mother, who went to live at Betton Hall near Market Drayton, and his paternal grandfather, Sir Oswald Mosley, 4th Baronet.[5] His mother had a small alimony, and was impoverished by comparison to the rest of the family. As Mosley rarely was able to see his father, his mother became more attached to him.[14] His grandfather took the role of a male parental figure in Mosley's life;[15] likewise, his grandfather disliked his father, and saw Mosley as a substitute son. The 4th Baronet was seen as a masculine figure by Mosley, and developed his own masculine image based on his grandfather, alongside various pop-cultural ideas.[16]


Mosley studied at West Downs School in Winchester from 1906 onward, eventually joined by Edward, where Oswald developed a reputation as a debater.[17] He then joined Winchester College in 1909 at the age of 12, a year early, and found school both hard and boring;[n 2] he did not socialise. During this period he hunted extensively, shooting 50 partridges, 18 pheasants, 11 rabbits and 10 hares over the winter from 1909 to 1910, as well as fishing at Rolleston.[18] He also became a boxer by age 15, winning a light-weight championship, and attempted to enter the Public Schools' boxing championship, but was forbidden to do so by his headmaster; Mosley then took up fencing instead.[19] He was a fencing champion in his school days, winning titles in both foil and sabre,[5] and becoming the first boy to win both and the youngest to win either at the Public Schools' championship.[20] He retained an enthusiasm for the sport throughout his life.[5]


Military service
Mosley in officer uniform
Mosley left college in 1912, briefly staying in Brest, France in summer 1913, where he competed in fencing. After returning to England,[21] he became keen on entering the army, entering the Royal Military College, Sandhurst in January 1914. He considered his period at the military college to be "one of the happiest times of [his] entire life”,[22] but was expelled in June for a "riotous act of retaliation" against a fellow student.[23][page needed] John Masters made a claim that Mosley was thrown out of a window by other cadets; according to Dorril, he had actually slipped and fallen while recruiting for the retaliation against a group of cadets who had attacked him. He was sent away from the college that weekend.[22]


During the First World War, he was commissioned into the British cavalry unit the 16th The Queen's Lancers and fought in France on the Western Front. He transferred to the Royal Flying Corps as a pilot and an air observer,[24] but while demonstrating in front of his mother and sister he crashed, which left him with a permanent limp, as well as a reputation for being brave and somewhat reckless.[25] He returned to the Lancers, but was invalided out with an injured leg.[23][page needed] He spent the remainder of the war at desk jobs in the Ministry of Munitions and in the Foreign Office.[23][page needed]


Marriage to Lady Cynthia Curzon
Oswald Mosley and Lady Cynthia Curzon on their wedding day, 11 May 1920


On 11 May 1920, Mosley married Lady Cynthia "Cimmie" Curzon, the second daughter of George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston, the Foreign Secretary and former Viceroy of India, and Lord Curzon's first wife, the American mercantile heiress Mary Leiter. It was later alleged by Arnold Leese, a political rival of Mosley's in the early 1930s who founded the Imperial Fascist League and considered the BUF to be insufficiently antisemitic, that Cynthia had been "of Jewish descent",[26] and falsely claimed that she "had had a Jewish grandfather."[27] In March 1920, Mosley met Lord Curzon to inform him about the marriage and request his approval. In a letter written afterwards to his American-born second wife, Grace Curzon, Marchioness Curzon of Kedleston, his future father-in-law made the casually antisemitic remark that Mosley possessed a "rather a Jewish appearance."[28]


Lord Curzon had to be persuaded that Mosley was a suitable husband, as he suspected Mosley was largely motivated by social advancement in Conservative Party politics and Cynthia's inheritance. The wedding took place in the Chapel Royal in St James's Palace in London. The hundreds of guests included King George V and Queen Mary, as well as foreign royalty such as the Duke and Duchess of Brabant (later King Leopold III and Queen Astrid of Belgium).[25][29]


During his marriage to Cynthia, Mosley engaged in an extended affair with his wife's younger sister, Lady Alexandra Metcalfe, while also carrying on a separate affair with their stepmother Grace, who had been a widow since her husband's death in 1925.[30] He succeeded to the Mosley baronetcy of Ancoats upon his father's death in 1928.


Entering Westminster as a Conservative

Mosley was first encouraged to enter politics by F. E. Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead.[31] By the end of the First World War Mosley, aged 21, had decided to go into politics as a member of Parliament, as he had no university education or practical experience because of the war. He was driven by, and in Parliament spoke of, a passionate conviction to avoid any future war, and this seemingly motivated his career. Uninterested in party labels, Mosley primarily identified himself as a representative of the "war generation" who would aim to create a "land fit for heroes".[32] Largely because of his family background and war service, local Conservative and Liberal associations made appeals to Mosley in several constituencies.


Mosley considered contesting the constituency of Stone in his home county of Staffordshire, but ultimately chose the Conservative stronghold of Harrow, for it was closer to London and, as Mosley claimed, a seat that he sought to win on his own merits, free from family connections.[33] On 23 July 1918 Mosley competed with three other candidates for the Conservative nomination at the upcoming general election. Though his 15-minute speech "fell flat", Mosley won over the 43 delegates with the "lucid and trenchant manner" in which he answered their questions.[33] Mosley's opponent in the parliamentary election was an independent, A. R. Chamberlayne, an elderly solicitor who complained that the well-connected, wealthy Mosley was "a creature of the party machine" and too young to serve as a member of Parliament.[33] Mosley retorted that many of Britain's greatest politicians entered Parliament between the ages of 19 to 25, such as Charles James Fox, William Pitt the Younger, William Ewart Gladstone, Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston and Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury.[34] Mosley chose red as his campaign colour rather than the traditional blue associated with conservatism.[35] Mosley easily defeated Chamberlayne with a majority of nearly 11,000.[36]


He was the youngest member of the House of Commons to take his seat, although Joseph Sweeney, a Sinn Féin member, and therefore an abstentionist, was seven months younger. He soon distinguished himself as an orator and political player, one marked by confidence, and made a point of speaking in the Commons without notes.[37][independent source needed]


Mosley was an early supporter of the economist John Maynard Keynes.[38][39] Mosley's economic programme, which he coined "socialistic imperialism," advocated for improved industrial wages and hours, the nationalisation  of electricity and transportation, slum-clearance, the protection of "essential industries" from "unfair competition," and higher government investment in education, child-welfare, and health services.[40][41]


Crossing the floor
Portrait of Oswald Mosley by Glyn Philpot, 1925

Mosley was at this time falling out with the Conservatives over their Irish policy, and condemned the operations of the Black and Tans against civilians during the Irish War of Independence.[42] He was secretary of the Peace with Ireland Council.[43][44][45][page needed] As secretary of the council, he proposed sending a commission to Ireland to examine on-the-spot reprisals by the Black and Tans.[46] T. P. O'Connor, a prominent MP of the Irish Parliamentary Party, later wrote to Mosley's wife Cynthia, "I regard him as the man who really began the break-up of the Black and Tan savagery."[47] Mosley's initial speeches in parliament about the issue were moderate, and "he betrayed no sympathy for the IRA";[48] he even declared that "in the present state of Ireland one certainly cannot deny the right to shoot a man who, when challenged, refuses to hold up his hands. Anything of that sort is perfectly legitimate."[48] However, as the conflict worsened and reports of atrocities committed by British forces increased, Mosley became more radical in his denunciations.


In his memoir, My Life, published in 1968, Mosley recalled that the war in Ireland had ‘evoked intense moral feeling’. With each atrocity committed by the Black and Tans he felt ‘that the name of Britain was being disgraced, every rule of good soldierly conduct disregarded, and every decent instinct of humanity outraged’.[48]


Mosley became "one of a small handful of MPs who pursued"[48] then Prime Minister David Lloyd George and the Chief Secretary for Ireland, Sir Hamar Greenwood, "over the unacknowledged policy of reprisals."[48] However, "[t]he root of Mosley’s case against the Black and Tans was that their behaviour undermined the superiority of British imperial rule."[48]


In mid-1920, Mosley issued a memorandum proposing that Britain's governance over Ireland should mirror the policy of the United States towards Cuba, in effect granting Ireland internal autonomy while retaining British oversight regarding defence and foreign policy matters.[49] In November 1920, he questioned Greenwood directly in Parliament on the case of Eileen Quinn, a young pregnant mother who was shot and killed in County Galway by the Black and Tans.[50]


In late 1920, Mosley crossed the floor to sit as an independent MP on the opposition side of the House of Commons. Having built up a following in his constituency, he retained it against a Conservative challenge in the 1922 and 1923 general elections.


The Liberal Westminster Gazette wrote that Mosley was "the most polished literary speaker in the Commons, words flow from him in graceful epigrammatic phrases that have a sting in them for the government and the Conservatives. To listen to him is an education in the English language, also in the art of delicate but deadly repartee. He has human sympathies, courage and brains."[51][page needed]


Joining Labour




"We have made the acquaintance of the most brilliant man in the House of Commons - Oswald Mosley. 'Here is the perfect politician who is also a perfect gentleman,' said I to myself as he entered the room....He is also an accomplished orator in the old grand style, and an assiduous worker in the modern manner - keeps two secretaries at work supplying himself with information but realizes that he himself has to do the thinking! So much perfection argues rottenness somewhere...he seems to combine great personal charm with solid qualities of character, aristocratic refinement with democratic opinions."

— Beatrice Webb, 8 June 1923[52]


By now Mosley was drifting to the political left and gaining the attention of both the Liberals and Labour for his foreign policy polemics, which advocated for a strong League of Nations and isolationism (i.e. Britain should only go to war if it or the British Empire were attacked).[53] Mosley was growing increasingly attracted to the Labour Party, which had recently formed its first government (under Ramsay MacDonald) after the 1923 general election. On 27 March 1924 Mosley applied for party membership.[54] Shortly thereafter he joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP). MacDonald, who believed that aristocratic members gave Labour an air of respectability, was congratulated by The Manchester Guardian on "the fine new recruit he has secured."[55]


Unsuccessfully challenging Chamberlain
Election pamphlet for Mosley's 1924 Birmingham Ladywood campaign against Neville Chamberlain

When the government fell in October, Mosley had to choose a new seat, as he believed that Harrow would not re-elect him as a Labour candidate. He therefore decided to oppose Neville Chamberlain in Birmingham Ladywood. Mosley campaigned aggressively in Ladywood, and accused Chamberlain of being a "landlords' hireling" in reference to Chamberlain's controversial Rent Act of 1923.[56][57] Chamberlain, outraged, demanded Mosley to retract the claim "as a gentleman".[56] Mosley, whom Stanley Baldwin described as "a cad and a wrong 'un", refused to withdraw the allegation.[56] Mosley was noted for bringing excitement and energy to the campaign. Leslie Hore-Belisha, then a Liberal politician who later became a senior Conservative, recorded his impressions of Mosley as a platform orator at this time:


"Dark, aquiline, flashing: tall, thin, assured; defiance in his eye, contempt in his forward chin."


Together, Oswald and Cynthia Mosley proved an alluring couple, and many members of the working class in Birmingham succumbed to their charm for, as the historian Martin Pugh described, "a link with powerful, wealthy and glamorous men and women appealed strongly to those who endured humdrum and deprived lives".[57] It took several re-counts before Chamberlain was declared the winner by 77 votes. Mosley blamed poor weather for the result.[58] His period outside Parliament was used to develop a new economic policy for the ILP, which eventually became known as the Birmingham Proposals; they continued to form the basis of Mosley's economics until the end of his political career.


Mosley was critical of Sir Winston Churchill's policy as Chancellor of the Exchequer. After Churchill returned Britain to the gold standard, Mosley claimed that, "faced with the alternative of saying goodbye to the gold standard, and therefore to his own employment, and goodbye to other people's employment, Mr. Churchill characteristically selected the latter course."[59]
Oswald and Cynthia Mosley with working-class supporters in Birmingham, 1924


India and Gandhi

Among his many travels, Mosley, accompanied by Lady Cynthia, travelled in the winter of 1924 to British India, which he would later characterise as "a land of contrast, of ineffable beauty and of darkest sorrow, a jewel of the world, which challenges mankind to save it".[60] His father-in-law's past as Viceroy of India allowed for the acquaintance of various personalities along the journey. They travelled by ship and stopped briefly in Cairo in the Kingdom of Egypt.


Having initially arrived in Ceylon (present-day Sri Lanka), the journey then continued through mainland India. They spent these initial days in the government house of Ceylon, followed by Madras and then Calcutta, where the governor at the time was Victor Bulwer-Lytton, 2nd Earl of Lytton.[61] During this journey Mosley came in contact with many prominent activists, including Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Chittaranjan Das and Motilal Nehru.[62]


Mosley met Mahatma Gandhi through Charles Freer Andrews, a clergyman and an intimate friend of the "Indian Saint", as Mosley described him. They met in Kadda, where Gandhi was quick to invite him to a private conference in which Gandhi was chairman. Mosley later called Gandhi a "sympathetic personality of subtle intelligence".[63] 
Mosley (right) swimming with Franklin D. Roosevelt (centre) and Maunsell Crosby (left) in Florida, February 1926


Return to Parliament

On 22 November 1926 the Labour-held seat of Smethwick fell vacant upon the resignation of John Davison, and Mosley was confident that this seat would return him to Westminster (having lost against Chamberlain in 1924). In his autobiography Mosley felt that the campaign was dominated by Conservative attacks on him for being too rich, including claims that he was covering up his wealth.[64] In fact, during this campaign, the Daily Mail frequently attacked "Mr. Silver Spoon Mosley" for preaching socialism "in a twenty guineas Savile Row suit" while Lady Cynthia wore a "charming dress glittering with diamonds."[65] As the historian Robert Skidelsky writes, "The papers were full of gossipy items about the wealthy socialist couple frolicking on the Riviera, spending thousands of pounds in renovating their 'mansion' and generally living a debauched aristocratic life."[65] The recurring accusation against Mosley was that he was a "champagne socialist" who "never did a day's work in his life." Mosley, in response, told his Smethwick supporters, "While I am being abused by the Capitalist Press I know I am doing effective work for the Labour cause."[66] At the by-election's polling day (21 December), Mosley was victorious with a majority of 6,582 over the Conservative candidate, M. J. Pike.




"This is not a by-election, it is history. The result of this election sends out a message to every worker in the land. You have met and beaten the Press of reaction....Tonight all Britain looks to you and thanks you. My wonderful friends of Smethwick, by your heroic battle against a whole world in arms, I believe you have introduced a new era for British democracy."

— Oswald Mosley, election victory speech, 21 December 1926[67]


In 1927, he mocked the British Fascists as "black-shirted buffoons, making a cheap imitation of ice-cream sellers". The ILP elected him to Labour's National Executive Committee.[68]


Mosley and Cynthia were committed Fabians in the 1920s and at the start of the 1930s. Mosley appears in a list of names of Fabians from Fabian News and the Fabian Society Annual Report 1929–31. He was Kingsway Hall lecturer in 1924 and Livingstone Hall lecturer in 1931.


Office


Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Mosley as a young minister in front of 10 Downing Street, c. 1929

Mosley then made a bold bid for political advancement within the Labour Party. He was close to Ramsay MacDonald and hoped for one of the Great Offices of State, but when Labour won the 1929 general election he was appointed only to the post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, a position without portfolio. He was given responsibility for solving the unemployment problem, but found that his radical proposals were blocked either by Lord Privy Seal James Henry Thomas or by the Cabinet.


Mosley Memorandum

Realising the economic uncertainty that was facing the nation because of the death of its domestic industry, Mosley put forward a scheme in the "Mosley Memorandum" that called for high tariffs to protect British industries from international finance and transform the British Empire into an autarkic trade bloc, for state nationalisation of main industries, for higher school-leaving ages and pensions to reduce the labour surplus, and for a programme of public works to solve interwar poverty and unemployment. Furthermore, the memorandum laid out the foundations of the corporate state (not to be confused with corporatocracy) which intended to combine businesses, workers and the government into one body as a way to "Obliterate class conflict and make the British economy healthy again".[69][70]


Mosley published this memorandum because of his dissatisfaction with the laissez-faire attitudes held by both Labour and the Conservative party, and their passivity towards the ever-increasing globalisation of the world, and thus looked to a modern solution to fix a modern problem. But it was rejected by the Cabinet and by the Parliamentary Labour Party, and in May 1930 Mosley resigned from his ministerial position. At the time, according to Lady Mosley's autobiography, the weekly Liberal-leaning paper The Nation and Athenaeum wrote: "The resignation of Sir Oswald Mosley is an event of capital importance in domestic politics... We feel that Sir Oswald has acted rightly—as he has certainly acted courageously in declining to share any longer in the responsibility for inertia."[51][page needed] In October he attempted to persuade the Labour Party Conference to accept the Memorandum, but was defeated again.


The Mosley Memorandum won the support of the economist John Maynard Keynes, who stated that "it was a very able document and illuminating".[71] Keynes also wrote, 
"I like the spirit which informs the document. A scheme of national economic planning to achieve a right, or at least a better, balance of our industries between the old and the new, between agriculture and manufacture, between home development and foreign investment; and wide executive powers to carry out the details of such a scheme. That is what it amounts to. ... [The] manifesto offers us a starting point for thought and action. ... It will shock—it must do so—the many good citizens of this country... who have laissez-faire in their craniums, their consciences, and their bones ... But how anyone professing and calling himself a socialist can keep away from the manifesto is a more obscure matter."[72]


According to Lady Mosley's autobiography, thirty years later, in 1961, Richard Crossman wrote: "this brilliant memorandum was a whole generation ahead of Labour thinking."[51][page needed] As his book, The Greater Britain, focused on the issues of free trade, the criticisms against globalisation that he formulated can be found in critiques of contemporary globalisation. He warns nations that buying cheaper goods from other nations may seem appealing but ultimately ravage domestic industry and lead to large unemployment, as seen in the 1930s. He argues that trying to "challenge the 50-year-old system of free trade... exposes industry in the home market to the chaos of world conditions, such as price fluctuation, dumping, and the competition of sweated labour, which result in the lowering of wages and industrial decay."[73]


In a newspaper feature, Mosley was described as "a strange blend of J.M. Keynes and Major Douglas of credit fame".[74] From July 1930 he began to demand that government must be turned from a "talk-shop" into a "workshop."[75][page needed]


In 1992, Prime Minister John Major examined Mosley's ideas to find an unorthodox solution to the aftermath of the 1990–91 economic recession.[76]


New Party
Main article: New Party (UK)

Mosley on the cover of Time in 1931

Dissatisfied with the Labour Party, Mosley and six other Labour MPs (two of whom resigned after one day) founded the New Party.


Its early parliamentary contests, in the 1931 Ashton-under-Lyne by-election and subsequent by-elections, arguably had a spoiler effect in splitting the left-wing vote and allowing Conservative candidates to win. Despite this, the organisation gained support among many Labour and Conservative politicians who agreed with his corporatist economic policy, and among these were Aneurin Bevan and the future prime minister Harold Macmillan. Mosley's corporatism was complemented by Keynesianism, with Robert Skidelsky stating, "Keynesianism was his great contribution to fascism."[77]


The New Party increasingly inclined to fascist policies, but Mosley was denied the opportunity to establish his party when during the Great Depression the 1931 general election was suddenly called. The party's candidates, including Mosley himself running in Stoke which had been held by his wife, lost the seats they held and won none. As the New Party gradually became more radical and authoritarian, many previous supporters defected from it. According to Lady Mosley's autobiography, shortly after the 1931 election Mosley was described by The Manchester Guardian:


When Sir Oswald Mosley sat down after his Free Trade Hall speech in Manchester and the audience, stirred as an audience rarely is, rose and swept a storm of applause towards the platform—who could doubt that here was one of those root-and-branch men who have been thrown up from time to time in the religious, political and business story of England. First that gripping audience is arrested,[n 3] then stirred and finally, as we have said, swept off its feet by a tornado of peroration yelled at the defiant high pitch of a tremendous voice.[51][page needed]
Before Mosley founded the British Union of Fascists, many political figures, such as Winston Churchill and Neville Chamberlain, attempted to woo him to their side.

Harold Nicolson, editor of the New Party's newspaper, Action, recorded in his diary that Mosley personally decided to pursue fascism and the formation of a "trained and disciplined force" on 21 September 1931, following a recent Communist-organised disturbance at a public meeting attended by 20,000 people in Glasgow Green.[78][79] Approximately four weeks before the general election, Mosley was approached by Neville Chamberlain to ally with the newly-formed National Government coalition led by Baldwin and MacDonald, with Nicolson writing that "the Tories are anxious to get some of us in and are prepared to do a secret deal."[80] Throughout early 1932 David Margesson, the chief whip of the Conservatives, continually attempted to persuade Mosley to rejoin the party.[81] Meanwhile, Mosley was also approached by right-wing "die hards" who opposed the National Government and Baldwin's "centrist" leadership of the Conservative Party. This group included Winston Churchill, who "[promised] to come out in his support" should Mosley contest a by-election, and Harold Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Rothermere, the owner of the Daily Mail and the Daily Mirror.[82] In addition, Nicolson noted that Mosley was being courted by Joseph Kenworthy to "lead the Labour Party."[83] In the end, however, Mosley refused to return to the "machine" of the "old parties."[84] Convinced that fascism was the necessary path for Britain, the New Party was dissolved in April 1932.[85]


Fascism
Main article: British Union of Fascists


Part of a series on
Fascism


Principles

Actual idealism

Aestheticization of politics

Anti-communism

Anti-intellectualism

Anti-materialism

Anti-pacifism

Authoritarianism

Chauvinism

Class collaboration

Corporatism

Counter-Enlightenment

Cult of personality

Dictatorship

Direct action

Dirigisme

Heroic capitalism

Heroic realism

Machismo

Masculinity

National syndicalism

New Man

One-party state

Proletarian nation

Propaganda

Reactionary modernism

Social Darwinism

Social order

State capitalism

Statolatry

Supercapitalism

Third Position

Totalitarianism

Ultranationalism

Palingenetic



Topics

Architecture

Criticism

Culture

Definitions

Economics

Ideology

Movements

Paramilitaries

Symbolism



Politicians

Balbo

Codreanu

Doriot

Degrelle

Engdahl

Franco

Goga

Gömbös

Hitler

Ljotić

Mosley

Mussolini

Nakano

Oviglio

O'Duffy

Quisling

Pavelić

Pavolini

Preto

Primo de Rivera

Rodzaevsky

Salgado

Sima

Strasser (Gregor)

Strasser (Otto)

Szálasi

Valois

Van Severen



Intellectuals

Ahimeir

Arthuys

Bardèche

Brasillach

Céline

Chamberlain

Chesterton

Civinini

Corradini

Crainic

Croce

Cupcea

D'Annunzio

Dilling

Drieu La Rochelle

Evola

Gentile

Giani

Gini

Ilyin

Ionescu

Kita

Krannhals

de Lapouge

Lewis

Malaparte

Manuilă

Marinetti

Michels

Mosley

Ojetti

Ōkawa

Olivetti

Orano

Panero

Pirandello

Pound

Ramos

Rosenberg

Saint-Loup

Savarkar

Scaligero

Schmitt

Schwarz

Sorel

Spirito

Streel

Thomson

Ungaretti

Valois



Literature

Prussianism and Socialism (1919)

Fascist Manifesto (1919)

Mein Kampf (1925)

Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925)

My Autobiography (1928)

The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930)

"The Doctrine of Fascism" (1932)

Twenty-Six Point Program ofthe Falange (1934)



Organizations

Arrow Cross Party

Blackshirts

Brazilian Integralist Action

British National Party

British Union of Fascists

Stewards

Canadian Union of Fascists

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Fasci Italiani di Combattimento'

French Popular Party

Iron Guard

Kokumin Dōmei

Lapua Movement

Mouvement Franciste

National Fascist Party

Opera Nazionale Balilla

Republican Fascist Party

Revolutionary Mexicanist Action

Rexist Party

Russian Fascist Party

School of Fascist Mysticism

Silver Legion of America

Squadrismo

Slovak People's Party

Tōhōkai

Ustaše

Ustaše Youth

Verdinaso

VFO

Vlajka


Media

Ajan Suunta

Der Angriff

Critica fascista

Fashist

Il Popolo d'Italia

Je suis partout

L'Idea Nazionale

Nástup

Neues Volk

Das Schwarze Korps

Völkischer Beobachter


History

History of fascism

pre-1922

1922–1945

1945–present

March on Rome

Beer Hall Putsch

Gentile Reform

Aventine Secession

Second Italo-Senussi War

Libyan genocide

German election of 1932

Enabling Act

Austrian Civil War

Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution

1934 Montreux Fascist conference

Second Italo-Ethiopian War

1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle

Spanish Civil War

Unification Decree

Battle of Cable Street

Anti-Comintern Pact

Kristallnacht

Italian invasion of Albania

Pact of Steel

Peasant March

World War II

The Holocaust

Genocide of Serbs in Croatia

Downfall in Italy

Downfall in Germany

Downfall in Thailand

Downfall in Yugoslavia

Surrender of Japan

Nuremberg trials

International Military Tribunal forthe Far East



Variants

Albanian

Arab

Argentine

Nacionalismo

Orthodox Peronism

Austrian

Austrian Nazism

Brazilian

Brazilian integralism

British

Christian

Clerical

Crypto-

Croat

Eco-

Falangism

Francoism

Pétainism

Valoisism

Hindutva

Hungarism

Ibañism

Ilminism

Irish

Islamic

Italian

Intransigent

Japanese

Emperor-system

Statism

Restoration

Ultra-

Techno-

Nazism

Austrian

Hitlerism

Strasserism

Swedish

Neo-

Finnish

Legionarism

Pan-Turkic

Rexism

Romanian

Neo-

Romanianism/Stelism

Russian

Swiss

Syndicalist

Syrian

Third Position

National-anarchism

National Bolshevism

Nazi-Maoism

Uruguayan

Marzism

Revisionism

Sosism



By continent

Asia

Europe

Bulgaria

Netherlands

Russia

North America

Canada

United States

South America

Peru

Uruguay



Related topics

Anti-fascism

Axis powers

Donald Trump and fascism

Extremism of the centre

Fascist as an insult

Feudal fascism

Glossary of Fascist Italy

Lebensphilosophie

Mediterraneanism

Para-fascism

Paramilitary

Post-fascism

Proto-fascism

Red fascism

Social fascism




 Politics portal

v
t
e
Flag of the British Union of Fascists
Benito Mussolini with Mosley during his visit to Italy in April 1933

After his election failure in 1931, Mosley went on a study tour of the "new movements" of Italy's Duce Benito Mussolini and other fascists, and returned convinced, particularly by Fascist Italy's economic programme,[86] that it was the way forward for Britain. He was determined to unite the existing fascist movements and created the British Union of Fascists (BUF) in 1932.


The British historian Matthew Worley argues that Mosley's adoption of fascism stemmed from three key factors.[87] First, Mosley interpreted the Great Slump as proof that Britain's economy, which had historically favoured liberal capitalism, required a fundamental overhaul to survive the rise of cheap, global competition. Second, as a result of his experience as a Labour minister, Mosley grew to resent the apparent gridlock inherent in parliamentary democracy (see criticism of democracy). Mosley believed that party politics, parliamentary debate, and the formalities of bill passage hindered effective action in addressing the pressing economic issues of the post-war world. Finally, Mosley became convinced that the Labour Party was not an effective vehicle for the promulgation of "the radical measures that he believed were necessary to prevent Britain’s decline."[88] As Worley notes about Mosley, "Cast adrift from the political mainstream, he saw two alternative futures. One was the 'slow and almost imperceptible decline' of Britain to the 'level of a Spain'...[and the other] a deepening sense of crisis opening the way for a 'constructive alternative' to take the place of both liberal capitalism and parliamentary democracy."[89] Mosley believed that Britain was in danger of a Communist revolution, which only fascism could effectively combat.


The BUF was protectionist, strongly anti-communist and nationalistic to the point of advocating authoritarianism.[90] He claimed that the Labour Party was pursuing policies of "international socialism", while fascism's aim was "national socialism".[91] It claimed membership as high as 50,000, and had the Daily Mail and Daily Mirror among its earliest supporters.[92][93][94] The Mirror piece was a guest article by the Daily Mail owner Viscount Rothermere and an apparent one-off; despite these briefly warm words for the BUF, the paper was so vitriolic in its condemnation of European fascism that Nazi Germany added the paper's directors to a hit list in the event of a successful Operation Sea Lion.[95] The Mail continued to support the BUF until the Olympia rally in June 1934.[96]


Mosley's supporters at this time included the novelist Henry Williamson, the military theorist J. F. C. Fuller, and the future "Lord Haw Haw", William Joyce.


Mosley had found problems with disruption of New Party meetings, and instituted a corps of black-uniformed paramilitary stewards, the Fascist Defence Force, nicknamed "Blackshirts", like the Italian fascist Voluntary Militia for National Security they were emulating. The party was frequently involved in violent confrontations and riots, particularly with communist and Jewish groups and especially in London.[97] At a large Mosley rally at Olympia on 7 June 1934, his bodyguards' violence caused bad publicity.[98] This and the Night of the Long Knives in Germany led to the loss of most of the BUF's mass support.[citation needed] Nevertheless, Mosley continued espousing antisemitism.[99] At one of his New Party meetings in Leicester in April 1935, he said, "For the first time I openly and publicly challenge the Jewish interests of this country, commanding commerce, commanding the Press, commanding the cinema, dominating the City of London, killing industry with their sweat-shops. These great interests are not intimidating, and will not intimidate, the Fascist movement of the modern age."[100] The party was unable to fight the 1935 general election.[clarification needed]

Plaque commemorating the Battle of Cable Street


In October 1936, Mosley and the BUF tried to march through an East London area with a high proportion of Jewish residents. Violence, now called the Battle of Cable Street, resulted between protesters trying to block the march and police trying to force it through. Sir Philip Game, the police commissioner, stopped the march from proceeding and the BUF abandoned it.


Mosley continued to organise marches policed by the Blackshirts, and the government was sufficiently concerned to pass the Public Order Act 1936, which came into effect on 1 January 1937 and, amongst other things, banned political uniforms and quasi-military style organisations. In the London County Council elections in 1937, the BUF stood in three wards in East London (some former New Party seats), its strongest areas, polling up to a quarter of the vote. Mosley made most of the Blackshirt employees redundant, some of whom then defected from the party with William Joyce.


In October 1937 in Liverpool, he was knocked unconscious by two stones thrown by crowd members after he made a fascist salute to 8,000 people from the top of a van in Walton.[101]


As the European situation moved towards war, the BUF began to nominate parliamentary by-election candidates and launched campaigns on the theme of "Mind Britain's Business". Mosley remained popular as late as summer 1939. His "Britain First" rally at the Earls Court Exhibition Hall on 16 July 1939 was the biggest indoor political rally in British history, with a reported 30,000 attendees.


After the outbreak of war, Mosley led the campaign for a negotiated peace, but after the Fall of France and the start of aerial bombardment during the Battle of Britain overall public opinion of him became hostile. In mid-May 1940, he was nearly wounded by an assault.[102]


Marriage to Diana Mitford

Cynthia died of peritonitis in 1933, after which Mosley married his mistress Diana Guinness, née Mitford (1910–2003). They married in secret in Nazi Germany on 6 October 1936 in the Berlin home of Germany's Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda Joseph Goebbels. Adolf Hitler was their guest of honour[103], and gave as a wedding gift a framed photo of himself.[104]


Mosley spent large amounts of his private fortune on the BUF and tried to establish it on a firm financial footing by various means including an attempt to negotiate, through Diana, with Hitler for permission to broadcast commercial radio to Britain from Germany. Mosley reportedly made a deal in 1937 with Francis Beaumont, heir to the Seigneurage of Sark, to set up a privately owned radio station on Sark.[n 4][105][page needed]


Involvement in fascist plot

In 1939, MI5 uncovered Mosley's ties to a fascist conspiracy initiated by Archibald Maule Ramsay and the Right Club, known as the Kensington Conspiracy. The coup would have taken place after the German invasion of Britain.[1]


Internment

Mosley did not know that MI5 and Special Branch had deeply penetrated the BUF and were also monitoring him through listening devices. Beginning in 1934, they were increasingly worried that Mosley's noted oratory skills would convince the public to provide financial support to the BUF, enabling it to challenge the political establishment.[106] American journalist and writer John Gunther described Mosley in 1940 as "strikingly handsome. He is probably the best orator in England. His personal magnetism is very great".[98] Mosley's agitation was officially tolerated until the events of the Battle of France in May 1940 made the government consider him too dangerous. Mosley, who at that time was focused on pleading for the British to accept Hitler's peace offer of October 1939, was detained on 23 May 1940, less than a fortnight after Winston Churchill became prime minister.[25] Mosley was interrogated for 16 hours by Lord Birkett[106] but was never formally charged with a crime, and was instead interned under Defence Regulation 18B. Most other active fascists in Britain met the same fate, resulting in the BUF's practical removal at an organised level from the United Kingdom's political stage.[25] Mosley's wife, Diana, was also interned in June,[107] shortly after the birth of their son Max Mosley; the Mosleys lived together for most of the war in a house in the grounds of Holloway prison. The BUF was proscribed by the British government later that year.


Mosley used the time in confinement to read extensively in classics, particularly regarding politics and war, with a focus upon key historical figures. He refused visits from most BUF members, but on 18 March 1943, Dudley and Norah Elam (who had been released by then) accompanied Unity Mitford to see her sister Diana. Mosley agreed to be present because he mistakenly believed that it was Lady Redesdale, Diana and Unity's mother, who was accompanying Unity.[108] The internment, particularly that of Lady Mosley, resulted in significant public debate in the press, although most of the public supported the government's actions. Others demanded a trial, either in the hope it would end the detention or in the hope of a conviction.[25] During his internment he developed what would become a lifelong friendship with his fellow-prisoner Cahir Healy, a Catholic Irish nationalist MP for the Northern Irish Parliament.[109]


In November 1943, the Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison, ordered the release of the Mosleys. After a fierce debate in the House of Commons, Morrison's action was upheld by a vote of 327–26.[25] Mosley, who was suffering with phlebitis, spent the rest of the war confined under house arrest and police supervision. On his release from prison, he first stayed with his sister-in-law Pamela Mitford, followed shortly by a stay at the Shaven Crown Hotel in Shipton-under-Wychwood. He then purchased Crux Easton House, near Newbury, with Diana.[110] He and his wife remained the subject of much press attention.[111]


Post-war politics
Front cover of My Life 

After the Second World War, Mosley was contacted by former supporters and persuaded to return to participation in politics. In 1948 he formed the Union Movement, which called for a single nation-state to cover the continent of Europe (known as Europe a Nation) and in 1962 attempted to launch a National Party of Europe to this end. He had connections with the Italian neo-fascist political party, Movimento Sociale Italiano, and contributed to a weekly Roman magazine, Asso di bastoni (Ace of Clubs, published from 1948 to 1957), which was supported by his Europe a Nation.[112] The New European has described Mosley as an "avowed Europhile".[113] The Union Movement's meetings were often physically disrupted, as Mosley's meetings had been before the war, and largely by the same opponents. This may have contributed to his decision, in 1951, to leave Britain and live in Ireland.[n 5] He responded to criticism of his abandoning his supporters in a hostile Britain for a life abroad by saying, "You don't clear up a dungheap from underneath it."[114] In the 1950s, Mosley advocated that Africa be divided into black and white areas,[n 6] but the decolonisation of the 1960s put an end to this proposal.[23][page needed]


Mosley was a pioneer in the emergence of Holocaust-denial. While not denying the existence of Nazi concentration camps, he claimed that they were a necessity to hold "a considerable disaffected population", where problems were caused by lack of supplies due to "incessant bombing" by the Allies, with bodies burned in gas chambers due to typhus outbreaks, rather than being created by the Nazis to exterminate people. He sought to discredit pictures taken in places like Buchenwald and Belsen. He also claimed that the Holocaust was to be blamed on the Jews and that Adolf Hitler knew nothing about it. He criticised the Nuremberg trials as "a zoo and a peep show".[115]


In the wake of the 1958 Notting Hill race riots, Mosley briefly returned to Britain to stand in the 1959 general election at Kensington North. He led his campaign stridently on an anti-immigration platform, calling for forced repatriation of Caribbean immigrants as well as a prohibition upon mixed marriages. Mosley's final share of the vote, within the Kensington North constituency, was 8.1%.[116] Shortly after his failed election campaign, Mosley permanently moved to Orsay, outside Paris.


In 1961, he took part in a debate at University College London about Commonwealth immigration, seconded by a young David Irving.[117] He returned to politics one last time, contesting the 1966 general election at Shoreditch and Finsbury, and received 4.6% of the vote.[116] After this, he retired and moved back to France,[116] where he wrote his autobiography, My Life (1968). In 1968, he remarked in a letter to The Times, "I am not, and never have been, a man of the right. My position was on the left and is now in the centre of politics."[118]


Mosley's political thought is believed to have influenced some early proponents of the organic farming movement in Great Britain. The agricultural writer and ruralist Henry Williamson put the theories of "blood and soil" into practice, which, in effect, acted as a demonstration farm for Mosley's ideas for the BUF. In The Story of a Norfolk Farm (1941) Williamson recounts the physical and philosophical journey he undertook in turning the farm's worn-out soil back into fertile land. The tone contained in this text is more politically overt than in his nature works. Throughout the book, Williamson makes references to regular meetings he had held with his "Leader" (Mosley) and a group of like-minded agrarian thinkers. Lady Eve Balfour, a founder of the Soil Association, supported Mosley's proposals to abolish Church of England tithes on agricultural land (Mosley's blackshirts protected a number of East Anglian farms in the 1930s from the bailiffs authorised to extract payments to the Church).[119] Jorian Jenks, another early member of the Soil Association, was active within the Blackshirts and served as Mosley's agricultural adviser.[120][121][122][page needed]


Personal life
Diana Mitford c. 1932

Mosley had three children with his first wife Lady Cynthia Curzon.[5]

Vivien Elisabeth Mosley (1921–2002); she married Desmond Francis Forbes Adam (1926–1958) on 15 January 1949. Forbes Adam had been educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge. The couple had two daughters, Cynthia and Arabella, and a son, Rupert. She was a godmother to Queen Camilla.

Nicholas Mosley (1923–2017; later 3rd Baron Ravensdale, a title inherited from his mother's family), 7th Baronet of Ancoats; he was a novelist and wrote a biography of his father and edited his memoirs for publication.

Michael Mosley (1932–2012); he was unmarried and without issue.

In 1924, Lady Cynthia joined the Labour Party, and was elected as the Labour MP for Stoke-on-Trent in the 1929 United Kingdom general election.[123][page needed] She later joined Oswald's New Party and lost the 1931 election in Stoke.[124][page needed] She died in London in 1933 at 34 after an operation for peritonitis following acute appendicitis.


Habitually unfaithful,[125] Mosley would have affairs with friends of his wife as well as Alexandra[126] and Irene Curzon, two of Cynthia's sisters,[127][128] and with their step-mother Grace Duggan. Others included the actresses Maxine Elliott, Catherine d'Erlanger, Margaret Montagu, Paula Gellibrand,[126] Mary Taviner, Georgia Sitwell, the wife of the writer Sacheverell Sitwell,[125][123][page needed] and the socialite Sylvia Ashley.[123][page needed]


Mosley had two children with his second wife, Diana Mitford (1910–2003):[5]

(Oswald) Alexander Mosley (1938–2005).

Max Mosley (1940–2021); he was president of the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) for 16 years.  In later life, he developed Parkinson's disease.[129][130]


Since 2022 Mosley's grandson, Louis Mosley, has been head of the UK division of US tech firm Palantir Technologies.[131] His great-grandson, Daniel Mosley, 4th Baron Ravensdale, is a member of the House of Lords who sits as a crossbencher.[132]


Death and funeral

Mosley died on 3 December 1980 at Orsay. His body was cremated in a ceremony held at the Père Lachaise Cemetery, and his ashes were scattered on the pond at Orsay. His son Alexander stated that they had received many messages of condolence but no abusive words. "All that was a very long time ago," he said.[133]


Coat of arms

Coat of arms of Oswald Mosley




CrestAn eagle displayed ermine.
EscutcheonSable, a chevron between three pickaxes argent.
MottoMos legem regit. "Custom rules the law".[134]



Electoral record
 
General election 1966: Shoreditch and Finsbury


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Labour
Ronald Brown 
17,456 
71.1 
+2.7 




Conservative
Roger Sims
5,957
24.3
−7.3




Union Movement
Oswald Mosley
1,126
4.6
New





Majority
11,499
46.9
+10.1





Turnout
24,519
53.5
−2.2






Labour hold
Swing
+5.0




 
General election 1959: Kensington, North[135]


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Labour
George Rogers
14,925
42.8
−11.2




Conservative
Robert Bulbrook
14,048
40.2
−5.8




Liberal
Michael Louis Hydleman
3,118
8.9
New




Union Movement
Oswald Mosley
2,821
8.1
New





Majority
877
2.51
−5.3





Turnout
34,912
67.8
−1.9






Labour hold
Swing
−2.7




 
General election 1931: Stoke-on-Trent


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Conservative
Ida Copeland
19,918
45.6





Labour
Ellis Smith
13,264
30.3





New Party
Oswald Mosley
10,534
24.1
New





Majority
6,654
15.2
N/A





Turnout
43,716
75.9







Conservative gain from Labour
Swing





 
General election 1929: Smethwick[136][page needed]


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Labour
Oswald Mosley 
19,550 
54.8 
−2.3 




Unionist
Roy Wise
12,210
34.2
+0.5




Liberal
Maude Egerton Marshall
3,909
11.0
+1.8





Majority
7,340
20.6
−2.8





Turnout
35,669
78.9
+0.3






Labour hold
Swing
−1.4





 
1926 Smethwick by-election[136][page needed]


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Labour
Oswald Mosley 
16,077 
57.1 
+4.8 




Unionist
Marshall James Pike
9,495
33.7
−14.0




Liberal
Edwin Bayliss
2,600
9.2
New





Majority
6,582
23.4
+18.8





Turnout
35,862
78.6
+0.4






Labour hold
Swing
−9.4





 
General election 1924: Birmingham Ladywood


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Unionist
Neville Chamberlain 
13,374 
49.1 
−4.1 




Labour
Oswald Mosley
13,297
48.9
+2.1




Liberal
Alfred William Bowkett
539
2.0
New





Majority
77
0.2
−3.8





Turnout
27,200
80.5
+8.5






Unionist hold
Swing
−2.0




 
General election 1923: Harrow[136][page needed]


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Independent
Oswald Mosley 
14,079 
59.9 
−6.1 




Unionist
Edward Hugh Frederick Morris
9,433
40.1
+6.1





Majority
4,646
19.8
−12.2





Turnout
23,512
64.5
−0.6





Registered electors
36,475








Independent hold
Swing
−6.1




 
General election 1922: Harrow[136][page needed]


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




Independent
Oswald Mosley 
15,290 
66.0 
N/A 




Unionist
Charles Ward-Jackson
7,868
34.0
−48.3





Majority
7,422
32.0
N/A





Turnout
23,158
65.1
+14.7





Registered electors
35,592








Independent gain from Unionist
Swing





 
General election 1918: Harrow[136][page needed]


Party
Candidate
Votes
%
±%




C
Unionist
Oswald Mosley
13,959
82.3
N/A 




Independent
Arthur Robert Chamberlayne
3,007
17.7
New





Majority
10,934
64.6
N/A





Turnout
16,957
50.4
N/A





Registered electors
33,651








Unionist hold
Swing
N/A





C indicates candidate endorsed by the coalition government.


Chamberlayne was nominated by the non-party Harrow Electors League.


Archive and residences

Mosley's personal papers are held at the University of Birmingham's Special Collections Archive.


Mosley's ancestral family residence, Rolleston Hall in Staffordshire, was demolished in 1928.[137] Mosley and his first wife, Cynthia, also lived at Savay Farm, Denham.[138][139][140][page needed] Immediately following his release in 1943, Mosley lived with his second wife, Diana, at Crux Easton, Hampshire. In 1945 he moved to Crowood Farm, located near Marlborough, Wiltshire, which he ran. In November 1945, Mosley was summoned to court for allegedly causing unnecessary suffering to pigs by failing to provide adequate feeding and accommodation for them. When the decision of the court was announced, Mosley, who had pleaded not guilty, and summoned his own defence, was responsible for an outburst. The hearing lasted for five hours and the charge was dismissed.[141][142][123][page needed]


Mosley's residence in Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland, was Ileclash House, a Georgian property that had fallen into a state of disrepair until restored by Mosley in the 1950s.[143] In the same decade, he bought and restored Clonfert Palace, also in Ireland.[48][144]


In popular culture


Alternative history fiction

In the Elseworlds comic Superman: War of the Worlds, Mosley becomes prime minister after the defeat of the Martian invasion of 1938.

In Terrance Dicks' Doctor Who New Adventures novel Timewyrm: Exodus, Prime Minister Mosley is shown addressing Britain's first National Socialist parliament.

In Kim Newman's The Bloody Red Baron, Mosley is shot down and killed in 1918 by Erich von Stalhein (from the Biggles series by W. E. Johns) and a character later comments that "a career has been ended before it was begun".

In Philip Roth's The Plot Against America, a secret pact between Charles Lindbergh who has become president of the United States and Hitler includes an agreement to impose Mosley as the ruler of a German-occupied Britain with America's blessing after a ruse in which Lindbergh convinces Churchill to negotiate peace with Hitler, which deliberately fails—mirroring the dishonesty and repudiation of key Hitler-signed treaties, the Munich Conference Accord and Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.

In C. J. Sansom's novel Dominion, the Second World War ends in June 1940, when the British government, under the leadership of prime minister Lord Halifax, signs a peace treaty with Nazi Germany in Berlin. By November 1952, Mosley is the home secretary in the cabinet of Lord Beaverbrook, who leads a coalition government consisting of the pro-treaty factions of the Conservatives and Labour as well as the BUF. The government works closely and sympathises with the Nazi regime in Germany. Under Mosley's leadership, the police have become a feared force and an "Auxiliary Police" consisting mainly of British Union of Fascists thugs that has been set up to deal with political crime.

In Lavie Tidhar's A Man Lies Dreaming (2014), Mosley is running for (and eventually becomes) prime minister, in a world where the Communist Party of Germany, rather than the Nazis, successfully overthrew the Weimar Republic in 1933.

Mosley appears more than once in the works of Harry Turtledove.

The Colonization trilogy sees Mosley, still an MP in 1963, spearheading an effort to pass legislation revoking the citizenship of all Jews; the plan fails in the short term.

In the Presence of Mine Enemies (2003) empowers Mosley as British leader in a scenario in which Nazi Germany won the Second World War.

In the Southern Victory series, Mosley is the minister of war under prime minister Winston Churchill in an authoritarian and revanchist Britain after the Entente lose the First Great War. Taking power around 1932, the Churchill/Mosley government joins the Kingdom of France and the Russian Empire in attacking the German Empire and the Central Powers in the Second Great War from 1941 to 1944 with disastrous results.

In Guy Walters' The Leader, Mosley has taken power as "The Leader" of Great Britain in 1937. King Edward VIII is still on the throne after his marriage, Winston Churchill is a prisoner on the Isle of Man, and prime minister Mosley is conspiring with Adolf Hitler about the fate of Britain's Jewish population.

In the sixth book in Jacqueline Winspear's Maisie Dobbs series, Among the Mad, Maisie's investigation takes her to a meeting of Oswald Mosley followers where violence ensues.

In the 1944 World War II novel Kaputt by Curzio Malaparte, Mosley appears in an important dream sequence. This happens in chapter IV of the book that is based on the writer's experiences in Moldavia, just before he recounts his first hand experiences of the Iași pogrom.

In Roy Carter's alternative history novel, The Man Who Prevented WW2, Mosley wins the 1935 election, allies Britain with the Axis powers, abolishes the monarchy and declares war on Ireland and France.

In the mockumentary It Happened Here (1964), showing a Nazi-occupied Britain in the mid-1940s, Mosley is never mentioned by name. A British fascist leader resembling him is, however, shown in "documentary" footage from the 1930s. Mosley's portrait can be seen alongside Hitler's in government offices. The film's fictional Immediate Action Organisation seems to be inspired by Mosley's British Union of Fascists, with members referred to as "blackshirts" and the symbol of the BUF appearing on their uniforms.[145]


Historical and modern-day fiction

Film

In Darkest Hour (2017), Churchill, played by Gary Oldman, discusses with his Outer Cabinet the possibility of Britain becoming a slave state of Nazi Germany under Mosley if the decision is made to pursue peace talks right before his "We Shall Never Surrender" speech.[146]

In the film Pink Floyd: The Wall (1982), during the "In the Flesh" segment, the character Pink (at this stage in the story, a modern Fascist leader) is dressed in a fashion similar to that of Mosley's.[147]

In the film The Remains of the Day (1993), the character Sir Geoffrey Wren is based loosely on Sir Oswald Mosley.


Literature

Amanda K. Hale's novel Mad Hatter (2019) features Mosley as her father James Larratt Battersby's leader in the BUF.

Aldous Huxley's novel Point Counter Point (1928) features Everard Webley, a character who is similar to Mosley in the 1920s, before Mosley left the Labour Party.

In H. G. Wells's novel The Holy Terror (1939), the Mosley-like character Lord Horatio Bohun is the leader of an organisation called the Popular Socialist Party. The character is principally motivated by vanity, and is removed from leadership and sent packing to Argentina.

P. G. Wodehouse's Jeeves short-story and novel series includes the character Roderick Spode from 1938 to 1971, who is a parody of Mosley.[148]

Dorothy L. Sayers' Lord Peter Wimsey novel finished posthumously by Jill Paton Walsh, Thrones, Dominations, includes a discussion of Mosley's followers between Mary Wimsey and Harriet Vane following the occupation of the Rhineland.[149]


Music

Originally, Elvis Costello's song "Less Than Zero" (1977) was an attack on Mosley and his politics. Listeners in the United States had assumed that the "Mr. Oswald" in the lyrics was Lee Harvey Oswald, the assassin of John F. Kennedy, so Costello wrote an alternative lyric to refer to him.[150]

On Mosley's release from prison in 1943, Ewan MacColl wrote the song "The Leader's a Bleeder", set to the tune of the Irish song "The Old Orange Flute". The song suggests that Mosley had been treated relatively well in prison owing to his aristocratic background.[151]


Periodicals

In 2006, BBC History magazine selected Mosley as the 20th century's worst Briton.[152]


Television

The Channel 4 biographical miniseries Mosley (1998) starred Jonathan Cake.

The satirical television programme Not the Nine O'Clock News lampooned the British media's favourable 1980 obituaries of Mosley in a comedic music video, "Baronet Oswald Ernald Mosley". The actors, dressed as Nazi punks, performed a punk rock eulogy to Mosley, interweaving some of the positive remarks by newspapers from all sides of the political spectrum, including The Times and The Guardian.[153]

The BBC Wales-produced 2010 revival of Upstairs Downstairs, set in 1936, included a storyline involving Mosley, the BUF and the Battle of Cable Street.

Mosley, played by Sam Claflin, is the primary antagonist in the fifth and sixth series of the BBC crime drama Peaky Blinders.[154]

Mosley was played by Jonathan McGuinness in the first series of the BBC war drama World on Fire.

He was portrayed by Joshua Sasse in 2025 British historical drama series Outrageous.[155]


See also

The European

Houston Stewart Chamberlain


References

Notes


1 2 Renamed the British Union of Fascists and National Socialists in 1936 and subsequently renamed the British Union in 1937.

↑ In Mosley 1968, p. 35, Mosley claims that it was "only relieved by learning and homosexuality" and that he did not enjoy either. Dorril 2006, p. 11, explains the second in that his appearance made him "subject to male attention".

↑ Arrested in the sense of stunned or gripped.

↑ Amato 2002, pp. 278–279, quotes national archive document HO 283/11, which states that among the property seized following Mosley's arrest by the British government in 1940 was correspondence between Mosley and Beaumont dating from 1937.

↑ Walsh 2007: "In 1946, through his solicitor, Mosley told officials in Dublin that he was interested in settling in Ireland. De Valera was consulted and Mosley's solicitor was summoned to the Department of Justice to be told that 'the time was perhaps not opportune for him to take up permanent residence and that he might delay his decision for some time until international tempers were quieter'. Five years later with the hostility he encountered in Britain showing no sign of abating, Mosley moved to Ireland."

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 486: "In April 1948, he endorsed a plan by Oswald Pirow, a former South African cabinet minister and founder in 1940 of a pro-Nazi New Order, for dividing Africa into black and white areas."



Citations


1 2 Tate, Tim (25 April 2019). "Treason, Treachery and Pro-Nazi Activities by the British Ruling Classes During World War Two".

1 2 Dorril 2006, p. 21.

↑ Skidelsky 2004.

↑ Layborn 2002.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 "Mosley, Charles". Burke's Peerage, Baronetage & Knighthood (107 ed.). Burke's Peerage & Gentry. 2003. pp. 3283–3287. ISBN 0-9711966-2-1.

1 2 Lindfield 2023, p. 49.

↑ Dorril 2006, pp. 3–4.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 4.

↑ Dorril 2006, pp. 4–5.

1 2 Dorril 2006, p. 5.

1 2 Dorril 2006, p. 3.

1 2 Dorril 2006, p. 6.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 1.

1 2 Dorril 2006, p. 7.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 8.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 9.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 10.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 11.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 12.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 15.

↑ Dorril 2006, p. 13.

1 2 Dorril 2006, p. 14.

1 2 3 4 Rees 1990.

↑ Morris M. 2023.

1 2 3 4 5 6 "The meteoric rise and fall of a controversial politician". The Times.

↑ Lebzelter, Gisela C. (1978). Political Anti-Semitism in England 1918-1939. London: Macmillan. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-333-24251-3.

↑ Morell, John (2016). Lunn, Kenneth; Thurlow, Richard C. (eds.). British Fascism: Essays on the Radical Right in Inter-War Britain. Abingdon, Oxon.: Routledge. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-85664-874-8.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 87.

↑ Jones 2004, p. 21.

↑ Dowd 2000.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 68–69.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 69–75.

1 2 3 Skidelsky 1975, p. 69.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 73.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 75.

↑ Cross 1961, p. 12.

↑ Mosley 1968, p. 166.

↑ "Ten things you didn't know about Mr Keynes". Evening Standard.

↑ Skidelsky, Robert (1990). Oswald Mosley. Papermac. ISBN 978-0-333-48374-9.[page needed]

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 72–73.

↑ Cross 1961, p. 11.

↑ Alter 2017, pp. 58–63.

↑ "Oswald Mosley and Fascism in Britain". Spartacus Educational. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

↑ Walsh 2015.

↑ Villis 2013.

↑ Moulton 2014, pp. 48–101.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 99.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Walsh 2007.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 98–99.

↑ "SHOOTING FATALITY, GALWAY. (Hansard, 25 November 1920)". api.parliament.uk. Retrieved 29 March 2025.

1 2 3 4 Mosley 1977.

↑ Webb 1982, pp. 414–415.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 122–124.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 124–127.

↑ Cross 1961, p. 18.

1 2 3 Macklin 2006, p. 24.

1 2 Reekes n.d.

↑ Macklin 2006, p. 25.

↑ Skidelsky, Robert (1990). Oswald Mosley. Papermac. p. ??. ISBN 978-0-333-48374-9.[page needed]

↑ Mosley 1968, pp. 120–127.

↑ Mosley 1968, pp. 122–123.

↑ Mosley 1968, p. 126.

↑ Mosley 1968, p. 124.

↑ Mosley 1968, p. 190.

1 2 Skidelsky 1975, pp. 159–160.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 160.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, p. 163.

↑ Mount 2006.

↑ Thorpe 1997, pp. 71–72.

↑ Sihvonen 2008, p. 14.

↑ Skidelsky 1994, p. 170.

↑ Keynes 1971, pp. 473–475.

↑ Rubin 2010, p. 17.

↑ Rees 1979, p. 186.

↑ Worley 2010.

↑ Mance 2018.

↑ Skidelsky, Robert (1990). Oswald Mosley. Papermac. ISBN 978-0-333-48374-9.

↑ Nicolson 1968, p. 91.

↑ Worley 2011, pp. 69–70.

↑ Nicolson 1968, p. 93.

↑ Nicolson 1968, pp. 112–114.

↑ Nicolson 1968, pp. 89, 97–98, 108.

↑ Nicolson 1968, p. 115.

↑ Nicolson 1968, pp. 114–115.

↑ Skidelsky 1975, pp. 272–282.

↑ Bosworth 1970.

↑ Worley 2011, pp. 72–73.

↑ Worley 2011, p. 73.

↑ Worley 2011, pp. 78–79.

↑ Sanders 2019, pp. 17–18.

↑ "What 1930s political ideologies can teach us about the 2020s". Aeon. Retrieved 29 January 2022.

↑ "Daily Mail". British Newspapers Online. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2014.

↑ Cameron 1979, p. 52.

↑ Horrie 2003.

↑ Barker 2010.

↑ Blamires 2006, pp. 288, 435–?.

↑ Gould 2009.

1 2 Gunther 1940, pp. 362–364.

↑ "Who was Sir Oswald Mosley?". BBC News.

↑ "Sir Oswald Mosley and the Jews – Communist Scuffle With Police". The Times.

↑ Bona 2020.

↑ "Disturbances at Fascist Meeting". The Times.

↑ Robinson 2019.

↑ Dunn, Adam (28 October 2003). "Secrets of Hitler's English friend finally told". BBC. Retrieved 25 August 2026.

↑ Barnes & Barnes 2005.

1 2 "The Mosley Files". The Times. 14 November 1983. p. 11.

↑ "Lady Mosley Detained". The Times.

↑ McPherson & McPherson 2011.

↑ "Healy, Cahir". Dictionary of Irish Biography. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

↑ Amato 2002, p. 390.

↑ Mosley 1991, p. 503.

↑ Mammone 2011, p. 297.

↑ Meleady 2021.

↑ Guinness & Guinness 1985, p. 540.

↑ Philpot 2021.

1 2 3 Barberis, McHugh & Tyldesley 2005, p. 194.

↑ "Mosley Packs Them In", Pi Newspaper, 2 February 1961.

↑ "Letters". The Times. 26 April 1968. p. 11.

↑ Negus 2022.

↑ "On the Dark Side of the Land". Resurgence. Retrieved 13 September 2022.

↑ Andrew 2017.

↑ Coupland 2016.

1 2 3 4 Thompson 2015.

↑ Hartley 2003, pp. 325–?.

1 2 Hilton, Lisa (10 November 2011). The Horror of Love: Nancy Mitford and Gaston Palewski in Paris and London. Orion. ISBN 978-0-297-85961-1.

1 2 Courcy, Anne de (20 December 2012). The Viceroy's Daughters. Orion. ISBN 978-1-78022-574-6.

↑ Spence, Lyndsy (7 November 2016). The Mistress of Mayfair: Men, Money and the Marriage of Doris Delevingne. The History Press. ISBN 978-0-7509-6965-9.

↑ Lovell, Mary S. (14 May 2012). The Churchills: In Love and War. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-34225-3.

↑ "Who was Peaky Blinders Villain Sir Oswald Mosley?". Debrett's.

↑ Rahbaran 2006, p. 137.

↑ "How British tech giant Palantir is secretly changing the face of warfare". 23 September 2024. Retrieved 6 September 2025.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: deprecated archival service (link)

↑ Political Peerages May 2026

↑ "Sir Oswald Mosley cremated in Paris". The Times. 9 December 1980. p. 6.

↑ Kidd & Williamson 2003, p. 432.

↑ "UK General Election results October 1959". Politics Science Resources.

1 2 3 4 5 Craig 1983.

↑ "Rolleston Hall – General History". The local history of Burton on Trent. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

↑ "Understanding Historic Parks and Gardens in Buckinghamshire". Buckinghamshire Gardens Trust.

↑ "Slough | Denham". VisitorUK. Retrieved 13 September 2022.

↑ Skinner 2011.

↑ "Oswald Mosley papers: Nicholas Mosley deposit". Archives Hub. Retrieved 13 September 2022.

↑ "Newbury Weekly News". 26 November 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2022 – via PressReader.

↑ Browne 2011; Scanlon 2016; Martin 2018; Nolan 2020.

↑ Hourican 2021.

↑ Sorlin 1991, pp. 65–66.

↑ Darkest Hour (2017) – Death Before Disarmament Scene on YouTube

↑ Ebert, Roger (24 February 2010). "Pink Floyd: The Wall (1982)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on 13 November 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2022. I don't believe this dictator is intended as a parallel to any obvious model like Hitler or Stalin; he seems more a fantasy of Britain's own National Socialists led by Oswald Mosley.

↑ Atkin 2009, p. 260; Jones 2013.

↑ Sayers, Dorothy L. (1999). Thrones, Dominations. St. Martin's Paperbacks. p. 288. ISBN 978-1429913737.

↑ Thomson 2004, pp. 74, 84.

↑ Seeger 2009, pp. 240–241.

↑ "'Worst' historical Britons list". BBC News.

↑ Not The Nine O'Clock News: "Baronet Oswald Ernald Mosley", Some of the Corpses are Amusing. Archived 22 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine

↑ Adebowale 2019.

↑ Yossman, K. J. (25 June 2024). "Mitford Sisters Drama 'Outrageous' Casts Bessie Carter as Nancy, Joanna Vanderham as Diana". Variety. Retrieved 22 August 2024.



Works cited


Books and journals


Alter, Peter (2017). "Das britische Schwarzhemd". Damals (in German). Vol. 49, no. 4.

Amato, Joseph Anthony (2002). Rethinking Home: A Case for Writing Local History. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-23293-8. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2014 – via Google Books.

Atkin, Nicholas (2009). Themes in Modern European History, 1890–1945. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-39145-0. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 14 August 2015 – via Google Books.

Barberis, Peter; McHugh, John; Tyldesley, Mike (2005). Encyclopedia of British and Irish Political Organizations. London: Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 194. ISBN 978-0-8264-5814-8. Archived from the original on 26 May 2020. Retrieved 1 May 2013 – via Google Books.

Barnes, James J.; Barnes, Patience P. (2005). Nazis in Pre-War London, 1930–1939: The Fate and Role of German Party Members and British Sympathizers. Brighton: Sussex Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-84519-053-8. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2014 – via Google Books.

Blamires, Cyprian (2006). World Fascism: A–K. ABC-CLIO. pp. 288, 435–. ISBN 978-1-57607-940-9. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2015 – via Google Books.

Bosworth, R. J. B. (1970). "The British Press, the Conservatives, and Mussolini, 1920–34". Journal of Contemporary History. 5 (2): 163–182. doi:10.1177/002200947000500208. S2CID 159457081.

Cameron, James (1979). Yesterday's Witness. BBC.

Coupland, Philip M. (19 September 2016). Farming, Fascism and Ecology: A life of Jorian Jenks. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-30021-2.

Craig, Fred W. S. (1983). British Parliamentary Election Results, 1918–1949. Chichester: Parliamentary Research Services. ISBN 0900178019.

Cross, Colin (1961). The Fascists in Britain. London: Barrie & Rockliff.

"Disturbances at Fascist Meeting". The Times. No. 48620. London. 20 May 1940. p. 3.

Edgerton, David (2018). The Rise and Fall of the British Nation: A Twentieth-Century History. Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 978-0-14-197596-2.

Dorril, Stephen (2006). Blackshirt: Sir Oswald Mosley and British Fascism. Viking Publishing. ISBN 0-670-86999-6.

Guinness, Jonathan; Guinness, Catherine (1985). The House of Mitford.

Gunther, John (1940). Inside Europe. New York: Harper & Brothers. pp. 362–364.

Hartley, Cathy (2003). A Historical Dictionary of British Women. Psychology Press. pp. 325–. ISBN 978-1-85743-228-2. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2019 – via Google Books.

Hobbs, Mark (2017). "The men who rewrite history: Holocaust denial and the British far right from 1967". In Copsey, Nigel; Worley, Matthew (eds.). Tomorrow Belongs to Us: The British Far Right Since 1967. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781317190882.

Jones, Nigel (September 2004). Mosley. Haus Publishing. ISBN 1-904341-09-8.

Keynes, J. M. (1971). The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes: Activities, 1929–1931, Rethinking Employment and Unemployment Policies. Royal Economic Society. pp. 473–475.

Kidd, Charles; Williamson, David, eds. (2003). Debrett's Peerage and Baronetage (2003 ed.). London: Debrett's & Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 978-0-333-66093-5. Retrieved 25 April 2025.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: ref duplicates default (link)

"Lady Mosley Detained". The Times. No. 48656. London. 1 July 1940. p. 2.

Layborn, Keith (2002). "Oswald Mosley". Fifty Key Figures in Twentieth Century British Politics. Routledge. ISBN 9780203465455.

Lindfield, Peter N. (20 April 2023). The Marriage Bed of Henry VII and Elizabeth of York: A Masterpiece of Tudor Craftsmanship. Oxbow Books. ISBN 978-1-78925-794-6 – via Google Books.

Macklin, Graham (2006). Chamberlain. Haus Books. ISBN 978-1-904950-62-2.

Macklin, Graham (2020). "Sir Oswald Mosley: From 'Britain First' to 'Europe-a-Nation'". Failed Führers: A History of Britain's Extreme Right. Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge. ISBN 9780415627306.

Mammone, Andrea (2011). "Revitalizing and de-territorializing fascism in the 1950s: the extreme right in France and Italy, and the pan-national ('European') imaginary". Patterns of Prejudice. 45 (4): 297. doi:10.1080/0031322X.2011.605842. S2CID 145290608.

McPherson, Angela; McPherson, Susan (2011). Mosley's Old Suffragette: A Biography of Norah Elam. Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-4466-9967-6. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012.

Mosley, Diana (1977). A Life of Contrasts. Hamish Hamilton.

Mosley, Nicholas (1982). Rules of the Game: Sir Oswald and Lady Cynthia Mosley, 1896–1933. Secker & Warburg. ISBN 978-0-436-28849-4.

Mosley, Nicholas (1983). Beyond the Pale: Sir Oswald Mosley and Family, 1933–1980. Secker & Warburg. ISBN 978-0-436-28852-4.

Mosley, Nicholas (1991). Rules of the Game; Beyond the Pale. Dalkey Archives Press. ISBN 9780916583750.

Mosley, Oswald (1968). My Life. Arlington House. ISBN 978-0-87000-160-4.

"Mosley for Rector?" (PDF). Leeds Student. 21 October 1977. p. 1. Retrieved 25 April 2025.

Moulton, Mo, ed. (2014), "The postwar international order and the mobilization of public opinion", Ireland and the Irish in Interwar England, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 48–101, doi:10.1017/CBO9781107280717.004, ISBN 978-1-107-05268-0, retrieved 24 February 2022

Mount, Ferdinand (6 July 2006). "Double-Barrelled Dolts". London Review of Books. 28 (13). ISSN 0260-9592. Retrieved 28 February 2022.

Nicolson, Harold (1968). Nicolson, Nigel (ed.). Diaries and Letters: 1930-1939. New York: Atheneum. ISBN 9780002113168.

Reekes, Andrew. "The 1924 Ladywood Election: Neville Chamberlain faces Oswald Mosley". West Midlands History. Retrieved 24 April 2025.

Rahbaran, Shiva (2006). Paradox of Freedom. Dalkey Archive Press. p. 137. ISBN 9781564784889. Retrieved 17 August 2024 – via Google Books.

Rees, Philip (1990). Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890. Harvester Wheatsheaf. ISBN 9780710810199.

Rees, Philip (1979). Fascism in Britain. Harvester Press.

Rubin, Bret (Autumn 2010). "The Rise and Fall of British Fascism: Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists" (PDF). Intersections Online. 11: 17. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 17 November 2019.

Sanders, David (2019). Authoritarian Populism and Liberal Democracy. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International. pp. 17–18. ISBN 9783030179977.

Seeger, Peggy (September 2009). The Essential Ewan MacColl Songbook. Minnesota, US: Loomis House Press. pp. 240–241. ISBN 978-1-935243-12-0. Archived from the original on 2 January 2017. Retrieved 2 January 2017.

Sihvonen, Maija (2008). "Modern and Anti-Modern Elements in the Discourse of the British Union of Fascists" (PDF). p. 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2019.

"Sir Oswald Mosley and the Jews – Communist Scuffle With Police". The Times. No. 47039. London. 15 April 1935. p. 8.

Skidelsky, Robert (1975). Oswald Mosley. New York City: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. ISBN 9780030865800. Retrieved 24 April 2025.

Skidelsky, Robert (1994). Politicians and the Slump: The Labour Government of 1929–1931. Macmillan. p. 170.

Skidelsky, Robert (23 September 2004). "Mosley, Sir Oswald Ernald, sixth baronet (1896–1980)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/31477. (Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.)

Skinner, James (30 November 2011). Growing Up in Wartime Uxbridge. The History Press. ISBN 978-0-7524-8014-5.

Sorlin, Pierre (1991). European Cinemas, European Societies, 1939–1990. Psychology Press. pp. 65–66. ISBN 978-0-415-05671-7. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 9 February 2014 – via Google Books.

Thompson, Laura (30 September 2015). Take Six Girls: The Lives of the Mitford Sisters. Head of Zeus. ISBN 978-1-78497-088-8.

Thomson, Graeme (2004). Complicated Shadows: The Life and Music of Elvis Costello. New York: Canongate. ISBN 978-1-84195-796-8.

Thorpe, Andrew (1997). A History of the British Labour Party. London: Macmillan Education UK. pp. 71–72. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-25305-0. ISBN 978-0-333-56081-5.

Villis, T. (2013). British Catholics and Fascism: Religious Identity and Political Extremism Between the Wars. Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-27419-9.

Walsh, Maurice (Spring 2007). "Mosley in Ireland". The Dublin Review (26). Archived from the original on 31 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

Walsh, Maurice (2015). Bitter Freedom: Ireland In A Revolutionary World 1918–1923. Faber & Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-27197-9.

Webb, Beatrice (1982). Mackenzie, Norman; Mackenzie, Jeanne (eds.). The Diaries of Beatrice Webb. London: Virago. pp. 414–415.

"Who was Peaky Blinders Villain Sir Oswald Mosley?". Debrett's. 27 February 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2025.

Worley, Matthew (2010). Oswald Mosley and the New Party. Springer. ISBN 978-0-230-27652-9.

Worley, Matthew (January 2011) [22 December 2010]. "Why Fascism? Sir Oswald Mosley and the Conception of the British Union of Fascists". History. 96 (1 (321)): 72. doi:10.1111/j.1468-229X.2010.00507.x. ISSN 0018-2648. JSTOR 24429007. Retrieved 31 March 2025.



News


Adebowale, Temi (12 October 2019). "The True Story of 'Peaky Blinders' Character Oswald Mosley". Men's Health. Retrieved 28 September 2023.

Andrew, Steve (15 March 2017). "Green fascism? Bio shows surprising roots of organic farming movement". People's World. Retrieved 13 September 2022.

Barker, Revel (20 July 2010). "Darkness in the mirror". The Express Tribune. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 24 April 2025.

Bona, Emilia (13 September 2020). "How Liverpool ran a fascist leader out of town and showed what our city stands for". Liverpool Echo. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021.

Barling, Kurt (4 October 2011). "Why remember Battle of Cable Street?". BBC News. Retrieved 16 May 2018.

Browne, Bill (5 May 2011). "Fascist Oswald Mosley's house in Fermoy up for sale". The Irish Independent. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

Gould, Mark (22 February 2009). "Last reunion for war heroes who came home to fight the fascists". The Independent. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2017.

Horrie, Chris (11 November 2003). "Revealed: the fascist past of the Daily Mirror". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 April 2008.

Dowd, Maureen (11 June 2000). "Tea With Hitler". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 March 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2021.

Hourican, Emily (18 July 2021). "How the Mitford sisters' flight from fascism took them to Ireland". The Irish Independent. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

Jones, Charlotte (20 December 2013). "The Code of Woosters, by PG Wodehouse: Splendid, Jeeves!". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2016.

Mance, Henry (23 July 2018). "John Major looked to fascist Oswald Mosley for ideas on economy". Financial Times. Retrieved 25 April 2025.

Martin, Rose (28 April 2018). "House of the week: Perfectly restored, pristine period house in Fermoy". Irish Examiner. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

Meleady, Sean (4 November 2021). "Britain's post-war fascist pro-Europeans". The New European. Retrieved 24 February 2022.

Negus, Richard (27 July 2022). "Blood and soil: the Greens' fascist roots". The Critic. Retrieved 13 September 2022.

Nolan, Amy (30 January 2020). "Take a look at this incredible Cork mansion on the market for €2.75m". Echo Live. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

Philpot, Robert (15 September 2018). "The true history behind London's much-lauded anti-fascist Battle of Cable Street". Times of Israel. Retrieved 4 February 2021.

Philpot, Robert (20 March 2021). "Holocaust denial was already taking root in Britain during WWII, says UK author". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 10 July 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2021.

Robinson, Abby (27 August 2019). "Peaky Blinders' Oswald Mosley – the real story behind Tommy Shelby's new foe". Digital Spy. Hearst UK Entertainment. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 11 December 2019.

Scanlon, Eoin (21 April 2016). "€3.5 million Ileclash House for sale along River Blackwater". The Avondhu. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

"The meteoric rise and fall of a controversial politician". The Times. No. 66377. London. 5 December 1998. p. 36[S].

"Who was Sir Oswald Mosley?". BBC News. 26 August 2019. Archived from the original on 4 September 2020. Retrieved 22 June 2020.

"'Worst' historical Britons list". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 May 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2020.



Websites and others


Morris M. (16 June 2023). "Oswald Mosley: Hitler's Man in Britain". Biographics. Retrieved 25 April 2025.

"Ten things you didn't know about Mr Keynes". Evening Standard. 13 April 2012. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

"UK General Election results October 1959". Politics Science Resources. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2025.

"Understanding Historic Parks and Gardens in Buckinghamshire" (PDF). Buckinghamshire Gardens Trust. 16 March 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2025.



Further reading

Farndale, Nigel (2005). Haw-Haw: The Tragedy of William and Margaret Joyce. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-98992-0.

Gottlieb, Julie V. (2000). Feminine Fascism: Women in Britain's Fascist Movement 1923–1945. London: I.B. Tauris.

Pugh, Martin (2005). Hurrah for the Blackshirts!: Fascists and Fascism in Britain between the Wars. Random House. ISBN 0-224-06439-8.

Skidelsky, Robert (1969). "The Problem of Mosley: Why a Fascist Failed". Encounter. Vol. 33, no. 192. pp. 77–88.


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Oswald Mosley.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Oswald Mosley.




English Wikisource has original works by or about:
Oswald Mosley


Friends of Oswald Mosley at oswaldmosley.com, containing archives of his speeches and books

Oswald Mosley at IMDb

Newspaper clippings about Oswald Mosley in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW

"Mosley and the BUF". Exploring 20th Century London. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2012.

Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Oswald Mosley

"Hull Race Riot". Hull Daily Mail. 1936. (last accessible, 23 October 2017)

"Metropolitan Police records of the BUF incident at Olympia, 1934". British National Archives.

"MI5 surveillance of Mosley". BBC News.

Oswald Mosley on the Frost Programme, 1967 on YouTube

Sir Oswald Mosley Interview on Thames Television, 1975 on YouTube





Parliament of the United Kingdom


Preceded byHarry Deeley
 Member of Parliament for Harrow 1918–1924
Succeeded byIsidore Salmon



Preceded byJohn Davison
 Member of Parliament for Smethwick 1926–1931
Succeeded byRoy Wise




Political offices



Preceded byThe Lord Cushendun
 Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 1929–1930
Succeeded byClement Attlee




Baronetage of Great Britain


Preceded byOswald Mosley
 Baronet of Ancoats1928–1980
Succeeded byNicholas Mosley





v
t
eOswald Mosley
Organisations

New Party (1931–1932)

British Union of Fascists (1932–1940)

Fascist Defence Force (1933–1940)

Union Movement (1948–1973)

National Party of Europe (1962–1966)

Friends of Oswald Mosley (1982–)

Output

Europe a Nation

My Life (autobiography)

In culture

"Less than Zero" (song)

Mosley (TV serial)

Roderick Spode



v
t
ePan-European nationalism
Majorproponents

Alain de Benoist

René Binet

Per Engdahl

Guillaume Faye

Norman Lowell

Jean Mabire

Oswald Mosley

Karl-Heinz Priester

Robert Steuckers

Jean-François Thiriart

Dominique Venner

Francis Parker Yockey

Organisations

Europe-Action

European Liberation Front

European Nation State

European Rally for Liberty

European Social Movement

GRECE

Imperium Europa

Jeune Europe

National Party of Europe

New European Order

Parti Communautaire Européen

Parti Communautaire National-Européen

Related topics

Europe a Nation

The European

European New Right

Federal Europe

Identitarian movement

Pan-European identity



v
t
eFar-right politics in the United Kingdom
Pre-1945 groups

British Brothers' League

British Fascists

British People's Party

British Union of Fascists

The Britons

Britons Publishing Society

English Array

English Mistery

English National Association

Imperial Fascist League

The Link

Militant Christian Patriots

National Fascisti

National Party

National Socialist League

Nordic League

Right Club

Defunct post-1945 groups

Advance UK

British Democratic Party

British Empire Party

British Freedom Party

British People's Party

British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women

British League of Rights

British National Party

Column 88

Conservative Democratic Alliance

Constitutional Movement

English Defence League

England First Party

European Liberation Front

Flag Group

For Britain

Football Lads Alliance

Greater Britain Movement

International Third Position

League of Empire Loyalists

Liberty GB

National Democratic Party

National Democrats

National Fellowship

National Independence Party

National Labour Party

National Party

National Socialist Action Party

National Socialist Movement

1962

1997

Nationalist Alliance

New Britain Party

New Nationalist Party

Northern League

Official National Front

Patriotic Party

Pie and Mash squad (Casuals United)

Protestant Coalition

Racial Preservation Society

Revolutionary Conservative Caucus

Spearhead

Union Movement

United Country Party

White Defence League

White Nationalist Party

Western Goals Institute

Active groups

Blood & Honour

Britain First

British Democratic Party

British Movement

British National Party (BNP Youth)

Christian Council of Britain

Combat 18

English Democrats

Friends of Oswald Mosley

Homeland Party

Independent Green Voice

League of Saint George

London Forum

National Action

National Front

National Liberal Party

November 9th Society

Patriot Platform

Patriotic Alternative

Reform UK

Restore Britain

Order of Nine Angles

Racial Volunteer Force

Stop Islamisation of Europe

Traditional Britain Group

UK Independence Party

Pre-1945 people

Mary Sophia Allen

John Amery

Henry Hamilton Beamish

John Beckett

Hastings Russell, 12th Duke of Bedford

R. B. D. Blakeney

A. K. Chesterton

John Henry Clarke

Thomas Haller Cooper

Barry Domvile

Henry Drummond Wolff

Josslyn Hay, 22nd Earl of Erroll

William Evans-Gordon

Robert Forgan

Rolf Gardiner

Patrick Boyle, 8th Earl of Glasgow

Harold Elsdale Goad

Reginald Goodall

Robert Gordon-Canning

Louis Greig

Neil Francis Hawkins

J. F. C. Fuller

William Joyce

Arnold Leese

Rotha Lintorn-Orman

Frank McLardy

Unity Mitford

Diana Mosley

Cynthia Mosley

Oswald Mosley

Gerard Wallop, 9th Earl of Portsmouth

Archibald Maule Ramsay

David Freeman-Mitford, 2nd Baron Redesdale

Alliott Verdon Roe

Edward Russell, 26th Baron de Clifford

Alexander Raven Thomson

Graham Seton Hutchison

Leigh Vaughan-Henry

Herbert Vivian

John Warburton

Charlie Watts

Nesta Helen Webster

Arthur Wellesley, 5th Duke of Wellington

Henry Williamson

Ormonde Winter

Francis Yeats-Brown

Post-1945 people

Ian Anderson

Richard Barnbrook

A. F. X. Baron

James Larratt Battersby

Derek Beackon

John Bean

Jane, Lady Birdwood

Jonathan Bowden

Joshua Bonehill-Paine

Andrew Brons

Kevin Bryan

Jack Buckby

Eddy Butler

A. K. Chesterton

Mark Collett

David Copeland

Mark Cotterill

Nicky Crane

Simon Darby

Alex Davies

Jim Dowson

Sharon Ebanks

Richard Edmonds

Andrew Fountaine

Jayda Fransen

Paul Golding

Nick Griffin

Jeffrey Hamm

Anthony Hancock

Patrick Harrington

Ray Hill

Derek Holland

Tom Holmes

Katie Hopkins

Peter Huxley-Blythe

David Irving

Colin Jordan

Raheem Kassam

Arthur Kemp

Alex Kurtagić

John Kingsley Read

Alan Lake

Steve Laws

Richard Lawson

Tony Lecomber

Michael McLaughlin

Eddy Morrison

John Morse

David Myatt

John O'Brien

Roy Painter

Neema Parvini

Roger Pearson

Joseph Pearce

Denis Pirie

Kevin Quinn

Anthony Reed Herbert

Robert Relf

Jack Renshaw

Colin Robertson

Tommy Robinson

Robert Row

Simon Sheppard

Kenny Smith

Troy Southgate

Ian Stuart Donaldson

Keith Thompson

Danny Tommo

John Tyndall

Richard Verrall

Adam Walker

Anne Marie Waters

Paul Joseph Watson

Martin Webster

Robert West

Paul Weston

Graham Williamson

Martin Wingfield

John Graeme Wood

Milo Yiannopoulos

Related articles

Anglo-German Fellowship

Battle of Cable Street

British Fascism

British National Party election results

Cliveden set

Europe a Nation

List of British fascist parties

National Front election results

Organisation for the Maintenance of Supplies

Political Soldier

Rock Against Communism

Active notable publications

Candour



v
t
eFascism

Core tenets

Actual idealism

Aestheticization of politics

Anti-communism

Anti-materialism

Anti-pacifism

Authoritarianism

Chauvinism

Class collaboration

Conspiracism

Corporatism

Cult of personality

Dictatorship

Direct action

Dirigisme

Economic interventionism

Eugenics

Heroic capitalism

Heroic realism

Heroism

Imperialism

Indoctrination

Irrationalism

Machismo

Masculinity

Militarism

National syndicalism

Nationalism

Integral

Palingenetic

Ultra

New Man

One-party state

Perpetual war

Populism

Proletarian nation

Propaganda

Racism

Reactionary modernism

Social Darwinism

Social interventionism

Social order

State capitalism

Statolatry

Supercapitalism

Syncretism

Third Position

Totalitarianism

Topics

Definitions

Economics

Fascism and ideology

Fascism worldwide

Symbolism

Lists

British fascist parties

Fascist movements by country (A–F

G–M

N–T

U–Z)

Secretaries of Italian fascist parties

Related

Anti-fascism

Criticism of fascism

Fascist (epithet)

Fascist mysticism

Feudal fascism

Morenazi

Para-/semi-fascism

Post-fascism

Proto-fascism

Red fascism

Red–green–brown alliance

Roman salute

Sansepolcrismo

Social fascism

Sorelianism

Synarchism


Variants


Arab

Argentine

Nacionalismo

Austrian

Brazilian

British

Christian

Christian Identity

Mexican synarchism

Clerical

Crypto

Eco

English

Falangism

French

Doriotism

Pétainism

Neo-Pétainism

Jeune Nation

L'Œuvre Française

Valoisism

Hindu

Hungarian

Hutu

Ilminism

Irish

Islamic

Ziaism

Israeli/Zionist

Revisionist Maximalism

Italian

Intransigent

Japanese

Emperor-system

Statism

Restoration

Ultra

Techno

Korean

Latvian

Mystical

Nazism

Austrian

Esoteric

Hitlerism

Neo-Nazism

Russian

Strasserism

Swedish

Neo

Finnish

NRx

Pan-Turkic

Rexism

Polish

Romanian

Legionarism

Neo-Legionarism

Romanianism/Stelism

Russian

Neo-Eurasianism

Syndicalist

Syrian Social Nationalism

Third Positionism

National-anarchism

National Bolshevism

Nazi-Maoism

Uruguayan

Sosism

Ustašism


Movements

Africa

Coalition for the Defence of the Republic

Greyshirts

Muslim Association of the Lictor

National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Ossewabrandwag

Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines

Republican Democratic Movement

Young Egypt Party (1933)

Asia

Abhinav Bharat

Al-Muthanna Club

Aria Party

Azerbaijan National Democrat Party

Azure Party

Black Dragon Society

Brit HaBirionim

Concordia Association

Grey Wolves

Golden Square

Hindu Mahasabha

Iran-e-No Party

Kach

Kataeb Party

Kenkokukai

Kokumin Dōmei

Korea Nationalist Party

Korean National Youth Association

Lehi

Liberal Party (South Korea)

Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf

National Socialism Association

Nationalist Movement Party

National Will Party

Nation Party of Iran

Otzma Yehudit

Pan-Iranist Party

Palestine Arab Party

Progress Party (Iran)

Philippine Falange

Rastakhiz Party

Rastriya Prajatantra Party

Reform bureaucrats

Religious Zionist Party

Sakurakai

Sangh Parivar

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad

Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal

Bharatiya Janata Party

Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha

Bharatiya Jana Sangh

Bharatiya Kisan Sangh

Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh

Bharat Vikas Parishad

Ekal Vidyalaya

Hindu Makkal Katchi

Hindu Munnani

Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh

Jammu Praja Parishad

Muslim Rashtriya Manch

Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas

Rashtra Sevika Samiti

Rashtriya Sikh Sangat

Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh

Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana

Seva Bharati

Vidya Bharati

Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram

Vishva Hindu Parishad

Bajrang Dal

Durga Vahini

SUMKA

Syrian Social Nationalist Party

Tōhōkai

Tsagaan Khas

Turkish Union Party

Wang Jingwei Kuomintang

Northern / Northwestern Europe

Academic Karelia Society

Ailtirí na hAiséirghe

Autonome Nationalisten

Bases Autónomas

Black Front (Netherlands)

Blueshirts

Breton Social-National Workers' Movement

British Democratic Party

British Fascists

Britain First

British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women

British Movement

British National Party (1960)

British National Party

British People's Party (1939)

British People's Party (2005)

British Union of Fascists

The Britons

La Cagoule

Casuals United

Centre Party '86

Clerical People's Party

Dutch Defence League

Dutch Fascist Union

English Defence League

European Defence League

English National Association

Le Faisceau

Fédération d'action nationale et européenne

Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation

Finnish People's Organisation

Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party

Flemish National Union

French National-Collectivist Party

French Nationalist Party

French Popular Party

General Dutch Fascist League

Greater Britain Movement

Groupe Collaboration

Heathen Front

Imperial Fascist League

International Third Position

Jeune Nation

Lalli Alliance of Finland

Lapua Movement

League of Saint George

Les Identitaires

Mouvement d'Action Civique

Mouvement Franciste

Nasjonal Samling

National Alliance (Sweden)

National Corporate Party

National Fascisti

National Front (UK)

National League of Sweden

Nationalist Party

National Popular Rally

National Rally

National Syndicalists

National Union (Netherlands)

National Union (Portugal)

New Party

Nipsters

Nordic League

Nordic Resistance Movement

Northern League

Norwegian Defence League

Nouvelle Droite

L'Œuvre Française

Official National Front

Order of Flemish Militants

Organisation of National Socialists

Parti Communautaire National-Européen

Party of Finnish Labor

Party of the Swedes

Patriotic Alternative

Patriotic People's Movement

Patriotic People's Movement (1993)

Pērkonkrusts

Phalange Française

Ragnarock

Rebelles Européens

Rexist Party

Rising Finland

Scottish Democratic Fascist Party

Scottish Protestant League

Skrewdriver

Skullhead

Stormers

Terre et Peuple

Third Way (France)

Third Way (UK)

Union Movement

Verdinaso

Vigrid

White Aryan Resistance

Central Europe

Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists

Arrow Cross Party

Artgemeinschaft

Austrian Nazism

Black Front (Germany)

Bund Deutscher Osten

Christian National Socialist Front

Deutsche Reichspartei

Eidgenössische Sammlung

Falanga

Free German Workers' Party

German Faith Movement

German National Movement in Liechtenstein

German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia)

German Party (Slovakia)

German Social Union

Honor

Hungarian National Front

Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party

Hungarian National Socialist Party

Combat League of German Socialists

Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia

Landser

Liechtenstein Homeland Service

National Democratic Party (Austria)

National Democratic Party of Germany

National Fascist Community

National Front (Hungary)

National Front (Switzerland)

National Movement of Switzerland

National Radical Camp

National Radical Camp (1993)

National Revival of Poland

National Union (Switzerland)

Nationalist Front (Germany)

Nazi Party

Greater German People's Community

Nazi Germany

National Socialist Freedom Movement

National Socialist Working Association

New Order

Nipsters

No Colours Records

PC Records

Positive Christianity

German Christians

Republic Movement

The Right (Germany)

Rock-O-Rama Records

Shield and Sword

Slovak People's Party

Socialist Reich Party

Stahlgewitter

Sudeten German Party

Szeged Idea

The Third Path

United Hungarian National Socialist Party

Vlajka

Völkisch movement

Volksdeutsche Bewegung

Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit

Wiking-Jugend

Southern Europe

ADÑ–Spanish Identity

Albanian Fascist Party

Balli Kombëtar

Brothers of Italy

CEDADE

Democratic Fascist Party

European Nation State

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Fasci Italiani di Combattimento

Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Falange

Sección Femenina

La Falange (1999)

Falange Auténtica

Falange Española

Falange Española Auténtica

Falange Española de las JONS

Falange Española de las JONS (1976)

Falange Española Independiente

Falangist Movement of Spain

Freethinkers' Party

Imperium Europa

Italian fascism

National Fascist Party (Italy)

Italian Social Republic

Republican Fascist Party

Italian Social Movement

Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista

Juntas Españolas

National Alliance (Spain)

National Alliance July 18

National Democracy (Italy)

National Democracy (Spain)

National Front (Spain, 1986)

National Front (Spain, 2006)

National Future

National Union (Italy, 1923)

National Union (Spain)

New Force (Italy)

New Force (Spain)

Republican Social Movement

The Right (Italy)

Sammarinese Fascist Party

Spanish Military Union

Struggle of the People

Student Action

Terza Posizione

Tricolour Flame

Unidad Falangista Montañesa

Youth Front

Eastern and Southeastern Europe

Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights

Bosnian Movement of National Pride

Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party

Croatian Liberation Movement

Croatian National Resistance

Croatian Party of Rights

Crusade of Romanianism

ELAM (Cyprus)

Ethnic National Union

Eurasia Movement

Eurasia Party

Format18

For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action

German Party

German People's Party

Golden Dawn

Greek National Socialist Party

Hosank

Iron Guard

Kolovrat

LEPEN

Liberal Democratic Party of Russia

Lithuanian Nationalist Union

National Agrarian Party

National Bolshevik Front

National Bolshevik Party

National-Christian Defense League

National Christian Party

National Fascist Movement

National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement

National Party – Greeks

National Socialist Patriotic Organisation

National Socialist Society

National Social Movement

National Romanian Fascio

National Renaissance Front

National Salvation Front

Nokturnal Mortum

Obraz

Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists

Pamyat

Patriotic Alliance

People's Party

Ratniks (Bulgaria)

Romanian Front

Russian Imperial Movement

Russian Fascist Party

Russian Women's Fascist Movement

Serbian Action

Serbian Radical Party

Steel Shield

Svoboda

Union of Bulgarian National Legions

Ustaše

Ustaše in Australia

Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood

Yugoslav Radical Union

ZBOR

North America

Fascism in Canada

Aryan Guard

Canadian Association for Free Expression

Canadian Union of Fascists

Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform

Heritage Front

Parti national social chrétien

Fascism in the United States

American Front

American Nazi Party

Fascist League of North America

Identity Evropa

League of the South

National Unity Party of Canada

Nationalist Social Club-131

Nationalist Front (United States)

Patriot Front

Proud Boys

Rise Above Movement

Silver Legion of America

Christian Party (United States, 1930s)

Traditionalist Worker Party

Trumpism

Donald Trump and fascism

Vanguard America

Volksfront

Revolutionary Mexicanist Action

Mexican Democratic Party

Mexican Fascist Party

National Pro Patria Party

National Synarchist Union

Nationalist Front of Mexico

Oceania

Action Zealandia

Antipodean Resistance

Australia First Movement

Australia First Party

Australian Defence League

Australian National Socialist Party

Centre Party

Lads Society

National Action (Australia)

National Socialist Network

National Socialist Party of Australia

Progressive Nationalist Party

Reclaim Australia

True Blue Crew

United Patriots Front

South America

Agrarian Labor Party

Argentine Anticommunist Alliance

Argentine Fascist Party

Argentine Nationalist Action

Argentine Patriotic League

Bolivian Socialist Falange

Bolsonarism

Brazilian Integralism

Brazilian Integralist Action

Brazilian Integralist Front

Falangism in Latin America

Iron Guard (Argentina)

Nacionalismo

National Fascist Party (Argentina)

National Fascist Union

Nationalist Liberation Alliance

National Liberation Movement

National Socialist Movement of Chile

National Universitary Concentration

New Triumph Party

Patriot Front (Argentina)

Popular Dignity

Popular Freedom Alliance

Popular Representation Party

Popular Socialist Vanguard

Republican League

La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia

Revolutionary Union

Tacuara Nationalist Movement


People

Australia

Campbell (Eric)

Campbell (Graeme)

Cottrell

Groot

Mills

Saleam

Austria

Dollfuss

Miklas

Pfrimer

Planetta

Schuschnigg

Seyss-Inquart

Starhemberg

Belgium

Daye

Declercq

Degrelle

Denis

Elias

Eriksson

Hermans

Lagrou

Poulet

Severen

Streel

van de Wiele

Croatia

Boban

Francetić

Kraljević

Kvaternik

Luburić

Pavelić

Pavičić

Rover

Servatzy

Finland

Helanen

Isotalo

Kalsta

Konkka

Kosola

Orko

Simojoki

Somersalo

Törni

Varjonen

France

Augier

Bardèche

Benoist-Méchin

Béraud

Brasillach

Bucard

Châteaubriant

Déat

Déroulède

Dior

Doriot

La Rochelle

Lagardelle

Laval

Pétain

Rebatet

Valois

Vial

Germany

Abetz

Andrae

Baeumler

Berchtold

Berger

Best

Brunner

Bühler

Darré

Falkenhausen

Hocke

Feder

Forster

Frank

Franz V

Gesche

Goebbels

Göring

Graf

Greiser

Günther

Hanke

Heiden

Hess

Heydrich

Himmler

Hitler

Klintzsch

Kuhn

Ludendorff

Maurice

Müller

Niekisch

Ploetz

Rahn

Reitsch

Renthe-Fink

Ribbentrop

Rieger

Rosenberg

Schmitt

Schreck

Skorzeny

Strasser (Gregor)

Strasser (Otto)

Streicher

Terboven

Thadden

Krosigk

Zündel

Greece

Dragoumis

Kasidiaris

Koryzis

Lagos

Michaloliakos

Papadopoulos

India

Adityanath

Advani

Bose

Godse

Golwalkar

Hedgewar

Mukherjee

Savarkar

Vajpayee

Iran

Forouhar

Kashani

Monshizadeh

Pezeshkpour

Teymourtash

Israel

Ahimeir

Ben-Ari

Ben-Gvir

Eldad

Eliyahu

Goldstein

Gopstein

Ha'ivri

Kahane

Marzel

Natan-Zada

Italy

Acerbo

Alfieri

Ambris

D'Annunzio

Azara

Badoglio

Balbo

Torrente Ballester

Bastianini

Bianchi

Boni

Bono

Boselli

Bottai

Ciano (Costanzo)

Ciano (Galeazzo)

Cogni

Corradini

Freda

Gentile

Giuriati

Gozi

Grandi

Graziani

Guidi

Malaparte

Marinetti

Michels

Morgagni

Mussolini

Olivetti

Panunzio

Papini

Pavolini

Rauti

Ricci

Ridruejo

Rocco

Rossoni

Sarfatti

Soffici

Spirito

Volpi

Japan

Akao

Araki

Chō

Hashimoto

Honjō

Kita

Kodama

Matsuoka

Nakano

Nonaka

Ōkawa

Sasakawa

Romania

Antonescu

Bacaloglu

Codreanu

Crainic

Cuza

Gigurtu

Goga

Manoilescu

Moța

Ogoranu

Sima

Russia

Astroŭski

Borovikov

Ilyin

Kaminski

Martsinkevich

Milchakov

Oktan

Rodzaevsky

Spain

Arrese

Bau Nolla

Bilbao Eguía

Carrero Blanco

Fernández-Cuesta

Franco

Franco y Polo

Giménez Caballero

Primo de Rivera

Ramos

Sánchez Mazas

Serrano Suñer

Ukraine

Dontsov

Klyachkivsky

Lebed

Samchuk

Shukhevych

Stetsko

Tyahnybok

United Kingdom

Beckett

Chamberlain

Chesterton

Lake

Leese

Mosley (Diana)

Mosley (Oswald)

Pankhurst

Pearson

Ramsay

Robinson

Southgate

Tyndall

Vaughan-Henry

Wellesley

United States

Auernheimer

Collins

Fuentes

Joyce

Pelley

Pound

Yockey

Other

Celmiņš

Martínez

Perón

Quisling

Ramírez

Riva-Agüero y Osma

Šešelj

Szálasi

Yeivin


Works

Literature

1776 Returns

La Conquista del Estado

The Culture of Critique

Defiance

The Doctrine of Fascism

Essentials of Hindutva

Fascist Manifesto

For My Legionaries

The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia

The Fourth Political Theory

Hitlers Zweites Buch

Hutu Ten Commandments

Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics

An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus

Kokutairon and Pure Socialism

The Last Will of a Russian Fascist

Manifesto of Race

Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals

Mein Kampf

My Autobiography

My Life

The Myth of the Twentieth Century

OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World

Protestantische Rompilger

A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century

Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews

A Warning to the Hindus

Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals

Action

Ajan Suunta

L'Alba

El Alcázar

The American Review

Der Angriff

Arriba

The Blackshirt

La Conquista del Estado

Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung

Das Deutsche Mädel

La Difesa della Razza

Eleftheros Kosmos

The European

Fashist

Fashizmi

La France au travail

Fritt Folk

Fronten

Gândirea

Gioventù Fascista

Golden Dawn

Hamaas

Hrvatski Domobran

Je suis partout

Kangura

Kansallissosialisti

Kesari

Limonka

Masada2000

Münchener Beobachter

Nash Put'

Nástup

Nation Europa

Neue Anthropologie

Neues Volk

Het Nieuwe Volk

Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift

Novopress

Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift

Organiser

Panchjanya

Panzerbär

Parole der Woche

Le Pays Réel

Der Pimpf

Il Popolo d'Italia

Das Reich

Revue d'histoire du fascisme

Das Schwarze Korps

Sfarmă-Piatră

Signal

Siniristi

Spearhead

Der Stürmer

Türkische Post

Der Umbruch

Vairas

Vlajka

Volk en Staat

Völkischer Beobachter

Die Wehrmacht

Wochenspruch der NSDAP

Film

L'Armata Azzurra

Bengasi

Condottieri

The Daughter of the Samurai

Erbkrank

Europa: The Last Battle

The Great Appeal

The Old Guard

Raza

Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal

Der Sieg des Glaubens

The Siege of the Alcazar

Lo squadrone bianco

Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht

Triumph of the Will

Music

Fashwave

Hindutva pop

National Socialist black metal

Nazi punk

Rock Against Communism

Other

Allach

StoneToss

Related topics

Art of the Third Reich

Fascist architecture

Heroic realism

Nazi architecture

Nazism and cinema


History



pre-1922

1922–1945

1945–present

1900s

Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust

1910s

Arditi

Fascio

Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria

Armenian genocide and the Holocaust

1920s

March on Rome

Corfu incident

Acerbo Law

Beer Hall Putsch

Aventine Secession

Italian economic battles

Le Faisceau

28 May 1926 coup d'état

Libyan genocide

1930s

March of the Iron Will

November 1932 German federal election

March 1933 German federal election

Enabling Act

Austrian Civil War

July Putsch

1934 Montreux Fascist conference

Romani Holocaust

4th of August Regime

Anti-Comintern Pact

Spanish Civil War

1940s

World War II

Nazi crimes against the Polish nation

The Holocaust

Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia

End in Italy

Nuremberg Trials

Tokyo Trials



Category



Authority control databases 
International
ISNI
VIAF
GND
FAST
WorldCat
National
United States
France
BnF data
Italy
Czech Republic
Spain
Netherlands
Norway
Latvia
Chile
Sweden
Poland
2
Vatican
Israel
Catalonia
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Trove
Archaeology Data Service
Deutsche Biographie
DDB
Other
IdRef
Open Library
2
SNAC
Yale LUX





















































Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oswald_Mosley&oldid=1378258467"
					Categories: 
Oswald Mosley
1896 births
1980 deaths
Military personnel from the City of Westminster
16th The Queen's Lancers officers
20th-century English memoirists
20th-century English male non-fiction writers
Anti-Marxism
Antisemitism in England
British Army personnel of World War I
British anti–World War II activists
British anti-Zionists
British Holocaust deniers
British political party founders
British white supremacists
Chancellors of the Duchy of Lancaster
Conservative Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies
Deaths from Parkinson's disease in France
English expatriates in France
English British Union of Fascist politicians
English prisoners and detainees
Graduates of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst
Independent Labour Party National Administrative Committee members
Independent members of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom
Labour Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies
Mosley baronets
Mosley family
Pan-European nationalism
People detained under Defence Regulation 18B
People educated at West Downs School
People educated at Winchester College
People from Burton upon Trent
People from Mayfair
People with Parkinson's disease
Racism in the United Kingdom
Royal Flying Corps officers
UK MPs 1918–1922
UK MPs 1922–1923
UK MPs 1923–1924
UK MPs 1924–1929
UK MPs 1929–1931
Union Movement politiciansHidden categories: 
Wikipedia semi-protected pages
Articles with short description
Short description is different from Wikidata
Use British English from May 2021
All Wikipedia articles written in British English
Use dmy dates from May 2021
Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2025
All articles lacking reliable references
Articles lacking reliable references from May 2022
Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2024
All articles with unsourced statements
Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025
Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2025
Articles containing Italian-language text
Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024
Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2025
CS1 maint: deprecated archival service
Webarchive template wayback links
CS1 German-language sources (de)
CS1 maint: ref duplicates default
Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB
Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter
Commons category link is on Wikidata
				
			
			
		
		
			
				
	
 This page was last edited on 3 October 2026, at 18:32 (UTC).
	
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
	
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


				
	
Privacy policy
	
About Wikipedia
	
Disclaimers
	
Contact Wikipedia
	
Legal & safety contacts
	
Code of Conduct
	
Developers
	
Statistics
	
Cookie statement
	
Mobile view


				
	

	



			
		
	 
 

	
		
			
				

Search
			
		
			
		
			
				
					
						
							
								
								
							
							
						
						Search
					
				
			
		
		
				
						
					
						
						

Toggle the table of contents
						
						
					
						
						
					
						
					
			
				Oswald Mosley
			
		
		
			
				


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
		
			
				

42 languages
			
			

Add topic
			
		
			
				
				
			
		
	


	
		
	




