 
323 
intersections online 
Volume 11, Number 2 (Autumn 2010)  
 
 
 
 
Bret Rubin, “The Rise and Fall of British Fascism: Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of 
Fascists,” intersections 11, no. 2 (2010): 323-380. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Modern connotations of "fascism" in mainstream Western society are unflinchingly 
negative, heavily associated with the historical regimes of Mussolini and Hitler begun before 
the Second World War.  It seems impossible to believe that the people of such an 
entrenched democratic country as Great Britain could ever harbor mainstream fascist 
leanings. However, fascism was not always such a vilified ideology in the West.  In the late 
1920s and 1930s in Great Britain, fascism was often admired by the public.  During Britain's 
deep economic depression, many pointed to emerging autocracies in Italy and Germany as 
powerful new examples of effective modern government.  The celebrated young British 
Member of Parliament Oswald Mosley became especially enamored of this new ideology in 
the early 1930s.  Mosley created the British Union of Fascists as a vehicle for his economic 
vision of Britain as a Keynesian economic state, with an emphasis on deficit spending.  After 
a period of initial popularity, his movement eventually became a haven for lunatic anti-
Semites and fringe members of society.  As Mosley became lost within the monster he 
created, frequent public violence at his group's rallies made him a national pariah. The 
impact of Mosley and his British Union of Fascists on British attitudes towards fascism 
cannot be underestimated. While it would seem that fascism's unpopularity was brought on 
by external forces, it was really Mosley's movement on the home front that initially turned 
the British public against the ideology.  It was Oswald Mosley, not Hitler or Mussolini, who 
did the most to ensure Britain remained a free democracy and never succumbed to fascism.  
 
 
 
http://depts.washington.edu/chid/intersections_Autumn_2010/ Bret_Rubin_The_Death_of_British_Fascism.pdf 
 
 
 
Fair Use Notice: The images within this article are provided for educational and informational purposes. They are being made 
available in an effort to advance the understanding of scientific, environmental, economic, social justice and human rights issues etc. 
It is believed that this constitutes a 'fair use' of any such copyrighted material as provided for in section 107 of the US Copyright Law. 
In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, the material on this site is distributed without profit to those who have an interest 
in using the included information for research and educational purposes. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
324 
The Rise and Fall of British Fascism 
Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By Bret Rubin 
Princeton University 
 
efore Sir Oswald Mosley, British fascism was nearly invisible, limited to a 
handful of radicals, and widely considered by Britons as a foreign 
phenomenon. The earliest fascist groups in the United Kingdom were simple 
imitations of Mussolini‟s Partito Nazionale Fascista. Rotha Linton-Orman founded 
the first of these groups, the British Fascisti, in 1923.
1 Splinter groups quickly 
broke away, including the National Fascisti in 1924 and the Imperial Fascist 
League in 1929.
2 Lacking a coherent ideology, and with membership in the 
dozens, their actions were limited to petty demonstrations and acts of vandalism. 
These groups received essentially no attention from either the press or the 
public. As such, British fascism remained limited to the very fringe of society.  
                                                            
1 Colin Cross, The fascists in Britain. (New York: St Martin's, 1961), 57. 
2 Ibid., 64. 
B 

Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
325 
When Sir Oswald Mosley founded the British Union of Fascists (BUF) in 1932, 
he launched fascism into the British mainstream. As a popular ex-Member of 
Parliament (MP), he seemed uniquely qualified to carry the unlikely ideology to 
the fore of British politics. His exceptionally visible career in Parliament from 
1918-1931 secured the nation‟s attention. During this time, Britons widely 
admired Mosley for his political dexterity and talent for oratory. After having 
dinner with Mosley in June 1924, famed English socialist author Beatrice Webb 
declared him the “most accomplished speaker in the House [of Commons].”
3 As 
such, when Mosley announced his formation of a fascist political organization, his 
decision piqued the interest of the public. For reasons to be discussed, Mosley 
felt that fascism was the only recourse to save the nation from the economic 
crisis. Regardless of his reasoning, his decision merited national attention. For 
the first time, British fascism amounted to more than “three old ladies and a 
couple of office boys,” as Mosley put it.
4  Mosley‟s movement served to widely 
publicize fascism as an ideology in Britain.  
 
Although the BUF enjoyed brief stints of moderate popular support, the public 
eventually widely condemned the movement, and this rejection had a significant 
impact on British attitudes towards fascism in general. Before Mosley and the 
BUF, the British public saw fascism as a foreign phenomenon existing outside of 
national concerns. Mosley‟s movement brought fascism onto British streets and 
as the public grew more conscious of the BUF, British disinterest gradually 
evolved into outright revulsion.   
 
Sir Oswald Mosley and his British Union of Fascists created the negative 
connotation of fascism that was solidified by the Second World War. As such, 
British negative perceptions of fascism began not with events in Germany or 
Italy, but at home. Although initially received as a benign curiosity, significant 
opposition against the BUF soon mobilized from a variety of sources. As the tide 
of public opinion began to sway against him, Mosley‟s politics grew increasingly 
radical and polemic. By 1937, he was a national enemy. His transformation from 
a widely admired bright young politician to a national pariah had a powerful 
impact on British attitudes towards fascism. As Mosley increasingly alienated his 
nation, he destroyed the credibility of fascism as an ideology.   
 
                                                            
3 Beatrice Webb, Norman Ian MacKenzie, and Jeanne MacKenzie, The diary of Beatrice Webb, Volume Four 1924-
1943, The Wheels of Life (Cambridge: Belknap, 1985), 20. 
4 Robert Jacob Alexander Skidelsky, Oswald Mosley (London: Macmillan, 1975), 291. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
326 
I. Beginnings: Fascism and Oswald Mosley, 1922-1932 
n the 1920s, British attitudes considered the new Italian ideology to be 
nothing noteworthy. Coverage of the Mussolini‟s rise by the British press was 
mixed, ranging from a complete lack of recognition to mild disapproval. The 
Daily Telegraph’s December 30, 1922 yearly review of important world events 
did not even mention the Italian fascist coup.5 The Times (London) of November 
18, 1922 declared Mussolini a “masterful man,” whose, “programme bears the 
stamp of his strong character,”6, reflecting the Conservative view that 
Mussolini‟s takeover marked the welcome end to Italy‟s previous corrupt liberal 
government, and was on the whole a positive resolution to Italy‟s dire political 
situation. “The rise of Fascismo,” The Times explained, was “the result, the natural 
result, of the progressive degradation of the representative system as it has been 
witnessed in Rome.”7 Other press organs were more critical. The Spectator of 
November 4, 1922 warned of the possibility of tyranny in Mussolini‟s 
government.
8  
 
Later, incidents such as the 1923 Italian bombing of the Greek island Corfu 
provoked negative commentary from British press. The Times declared that “no 
possible excuse can be made for the bombardment.”
9 Still, even this incident did 
not elicit total condemnation. The Daily Mail, the Observer and the Morning Post 
remained in support of Mussolini’s fascism.10 In the 1920s and early 1930s, 
fascism was more likely to provoke curiosity and debate than fear. It was in this 
political climate that Mosley launched the BUF in 1932.   
 
When Italian fascism was born in 1921, Oswald Mosley was in his third year as a 
Conservative MP for the district of Harrow. As the heir to the Baronetcy of 
Ancoats, Mosley came from wealth and prestige.
11 A young man from an 
aristocratic family, politics seemed a logical career decision. He first entered 
Parliament in 1918 at the age of 21, and quickly developed a reputation as a 
capable and confident speaker and politician. Although he was a member of the 
Conservative Party, his personal politics had little to do with the party. In his 
autobiography, My life, Mosley claims that he, “was going into the House of 
Commons as one of the representatives of the war generation, for that purpose 
                                                            
5  R.J.B. Bosworth, “The British Press, the Conservatives, and Mussolini, 1920-1934,” Journal of Contemporary History 
5, no. 2 (1970): 168. 
6  The Times, “Signor Mussolini‟s Declaration,” November 18, 1922, p. 11. 
7  Ibid. 
8  Bosworth, 168. 
9  The Times, “Signor Mussolini‟s Mistake,” September 1, 1923, p. 9. 
10 Bosworth, 169. 
11 Skidelsky, 37. 
I 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
327 
alone.”12  Mosley had fought on the Western Front in the First World War in the 
16th Lancers Regiment and later as a pilot in the Royal Flying Corp.13  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was Mosley’s experience in the war that most defined his character. Politically, 
it was his motivation. Mosley asserted that “in the case of the First World War, a 
single idea existed for me: always to do my utmost in all circumstances to 
prevent it ever happening again.”
14 Like many young veterans of the war, Mosley 
believed in the “need to conceive a nobler world in memory of those who 
died.”
15 He hoped to use politics as a vehicle to achieve this goal.   
 
What characterizes Mosley’s political career in the 1920s was his frequent 
change of allegiance.  From 1918 to 1924, he was a member of the Conservative 
Party, but left the Conservatives for the Labour Party in 1924, a move that 
coincided with the Labour Party‟s formation of a government in the House of 
Commons, a bold move for the young politician. As the MP for the constituency 
of Smethwick from 1926 to1930, his political career flourished. The Labour 
                                                            
12 Oswald Mosley, My life (London: Thomas Nelson, 1968), 90. 
13 Ibid., 93. 
14 Ibid., 49 
15 Ibid., 71. 
Sir Oswald Mosley with his wife, Lady Cynthia Blanche Curzon        
intersections            Autumn 2010 
328 
Government appointed him the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in 1929, 
making him a minister in Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald‟s Labour 
Government. By 1929, Oswald Mosley was poised to achieve significant political 
power in established politics. However, when the stock market crash of 1929 
created massive unemployment in Britain, Mosley dedicated himself to finding a 
solution. His radical economic ideas in the next few years (and Labour‟s reaction 
to them), were the catalyst for his downfall from established politics.   
 
The Mosley Memorandum  
he worldwide economic turbulence in 1930 left the United Kingdom in a 
serious depression. Unemployment, at ten percent at the beginning of 1929, 
skyrocketed to 22.2 percent by 1932.16 Coupled with a near five percent decline 
in gross domestic product, the clear political issue of the time was how to 
approach the economic crisis.
17 Following the stock market crash of 1929, 
Mosley began to campaign for an aggressive short-term plan to alleviate the 
economic crisis. In January 1930, he compiled what came to be known as The 
Mosley memorandum. In sixteen pages, Mosley detailed an astonishingly proactive 
approach to dealing with rampant unemployment.  
 
Mosley blamed the drastic rise of British unemployment on two things: the 
collapse of foreign economies, and Britain‟s dependence on exporting to those 
same economies. The collapse of foreign markets and the ensuing lack of British 
exports effectively crippled British industry. Orthodox economic policy in this 
situation focused on regaining Britain‟s previous share of the world export trade. 
Mosley saw this obsession with exports as an anachronistic holdover from before 
the Great War. He maintained that even if Britain could reclaim its previous 
export numbers, it would not be nearly enough to correct the labor surplus and 
return Britain to economic growth.
18   
 
At the time, British economic policy relied heavily on Smithian free-market 
principles. It was this deep-seated belief that contributed the most to the 
rejection of the Mosley memorandum by Parliament. Britain‟s previous success with 
an export-driven economy led to near-religious zeal for free-trade principles 
among the government. However, Mosley believed that the changing world 
                                                            
16 Joe Hicks and Grahame Allen “A Century of Change: Trends in UK Statistics since 1900” (London: House of 
Commons Library Research, 1999), 24. http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons/lib/ 
research/rp99/rp99-111.pdf. 
17 Ibid.  
18 Oswald Mosley, The Mosley memorandum (London: 1930), 3. 
T 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
329 
market rendered “the traditional basis of Britain‟s island trade” obsolete.19 As 
such, he held that protectionist policies would be essential to defend Britain‟s 
domestic industries, as well as to help loosen Britain‟s economic dependence on 
exports.  
 
Mosley‟s pessimism on world trade failed to convince. It was undeniable that the 
export driven economy had failed for the moment. However, Mosley believed it 
was impossible to ever recover Britain‟s previous trade balance. His prophecy of 
a “new era” of British economics dependent on the home market seemed too 
dismal. Many in Parliament believed in Mosley‟s call for a more active 
unemployment policy, but did not see the existing system as entirely outdated. 
His ideas for a sweeping reform of the foundation of British economics seemed 
an overreaction. The official committee appointed to evaluate the memorandum 
exemplified this attitude.  Led by Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Snowden, 
the committee rejected the memorandum in its entirety.
20 Still, Mosley believed 
that the nature of world trade had changed permanently. To survive, Britain 
needed an economy based on the home market.  
 
To create this new home market driven economy, Mosley argued for the 
implementation of import controls. In his autobiography, Mosley explains his 
“desire to develop a home market based on the purchasing power of our own 
people.”
21 Mosley understandably blamed much of Britain‟s economic difficulties 
on world affairs outside of British control. In advocating a policy of “insulation,” 
he hoped to mediate these consequences in future crises, as well as protect home 
industries from the competition of foreign interests with “virtually slave 
conditions.”
22 He cited America as a successful example of a country that had 
created a full-employment economy based on the home market.23  
 
Critics of Mosley‟s protectionist policies blasted this link with America. 
Snowden‟s report on Mosley‟s proposal maintained that Britain‟s size and lack of 
natural resources made a comparison with America irrelevant.
24 Britain was too 
dependent on foreign raw materials to try to limit imports. As such, a home-
market based economy was not feasible for Britain. Protectionism would 
devastate the real basis of Britain‟s economic success: trade. The lack of 
                                                            
19 Mosley, My life, 184. 
20 Susan Howson and Donald Winch, The Economic Advisory Council, 1930-1939: a study in economic advice during 
depression and recovery. (London: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 28. 
21 Mosley, My life, 253.   
22 Mosley, The Mosley memorandum, 9. 
23 Ibid. 
24 Howson and Winch, 29. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
330 
resources and demand supplied by other countries would cripple the British 
economy.  
 
Mosley responded to this criticism with the assertion that the British Empire 
could provide ample resources and trade opportunities. He argued that Britain 
could afford to emphasize the home market as long as it properly utilized its 
powerful international Empire. In this way, Britain could insulate itself from the 
swings of foreign economies, while using its own overseas territories for 
resources and markets.
25 Mosley also hoped to assuage unemployment through a 
significant government public works initiative. Over three years, Mosley 
proposed the allocation of 200 million pounds
26 to the purpose of creating 
government sponsored jobs for the unemployed.27 Among these jobs was a 
“mobile labour corps,” intended to provide more immediate aid to helping 
refurbish urban slums.
28 Mosley hoped to use deficit spending to help curtail 
unemployment, and boost morale with concrete and visible measures such as 
urban renewal.  
 
Mosley‟s ideas on economics were similar to the ideas of the famous theorist 
John Maynard Keynes. In fact, Mosley remained in close contact with Keynes 
throughout his time with the Labour Party.
29 Mosley and Keynes met often to 
discuss their ideas on the economic crisis.30 However, the extent of Mosley‟s 
ideas predated even Keynes himself. Keynes did not advocate Mosley‟s level of 
deficit spending until he wrote The general theory of employment, interest and money 
in 1936.31 Mosley‟s economic proposals were truly ahead of his time, and 
represented a radical departure from contemporary economic orthodoxy. To 
combat unemployment and to deal with the economic crisis in general, Mosley 
believed that political power needed to be more centralized. He argued for the 
creation of a new cabinet, led by the prime minister and other top MPs, which 
was to be advised by a think tank of economic experts.
32 This cabinet was to 
utilize all of the resources of the nation to fight the economic disaster. This kind 
of measure had some precedent in Lloyd George‟s Supreme War Council, 
                                                            
25 Mosley, The Mosley memorandum, 13. 
26 Converted to current values, ₤200 million in 1930 would be the equivalent of ₤6.684 billion in 2010. See 
Currency converter, The National Archives, http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/currency/results.asp#mid. To 
understand the significance of Mosley‟s proposal in relation to government expenditures, a £200 million outlay spread 
over three years stood in relation to national expenditures that totaled £2.28 billion from 1930 to 1932 (and just 
under £4.41 billion for local and national expenditures). See http://www.ukpublicspending.co.uk/. 
27 Mosley, The Mosley memorandum, 8. 
28 Ibid. 
29 Harold Nicolson and Nigel Nicolson, The Harold Nicolson diaries and letters 1907-1963 (London: Orion Publishing 
Group, 2004), 79. 
30 Skidelsky, 186. 
31 John Maynard Keynes, The general theory of employment, interest and money (London: Macmillan, 1936). 
32 Mosley, The Mosley memorandum, 13. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
331 
created in1916 to speed decision making in wartime. Mosley hoped to create a 
similar entity to deal with the economy.   
 
The idea of creating a powerful executive council in peacetime seemed unusual, 
if not despotic. However, one must understand how Mosley approached the 
situation. To him, the current economic crisis was every bit as serious as a war. 
The normal political bureaucracy was not responsive, powerful or well advised 
enough to deal with the present situation. He beseeched Parliament and the 
Treasury to understand the need for a more forceful, reactive approach to 
resolving the crisis. However, his reasoning alarmed some members of the 
House. Labour MP Rhys Davies declared in response to Mosley‟s committee 
proposal that “Our people have always preferred freedom with poverty to 
affluence under tyranny.”
33 Even as Mosley argued for a socialist response to the 
depression, he remained convinced that the government needed more authority 
to deal with the crisis efficiently. In this aspect of his proposed policy, Mosley 
demonstrated his belief in the need for strong government power in times of 
crisis. This concept would feature heavily in his later embrace of fascism.  
 
As Mosley himself pointed out, many of the economic concepts he espoused in 
his memorandum to Parliament would be readily accepted by the time he wrote his 
autobiography in 1968.
34 In 1930, however, many viewed his ideas as drastic if 
not suicidal. His contemporaries understandably doubted the feasibility of his 
ideas. How could Britain, a small island nation traditionally reliant on trade and 
export, suddenly completely reinvent itself into a self-sufficient industrial 
power? Mosley’s emphasis on a “home market based on the purchasing power of 
our own people” seemed difficult to imagine.
35  
 
Many recognized politicians criticized Mosley‟s view of the economic world. Sir 
Donald Maclean of the Liberal party attacked Mosley‟s concept of the ruined 
export driven system as far “too pessimistic.”36 He believed that Mosley‟s 
doomsday predictions were unreasonable and unfounded. Despite the 
seriousness of the economic crisis, Maclean maintained that Britain‟s trade 
balance was capable of recovery. In addition, he questioned the feasibility of 
expanding the home market. Maclean asked, “What home market can consume 
the output of our coal fields? Seventy-five per cent of the output of the South 
Wales coalfield is export, and there is barely one-fourth of the product of the 
                                                            
33 Daily Herald, June 23, 1930. 
34 Mosley, My life, 252. 
35 Ibid. 
36 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, October 29, 1930 (London: Hansard), column 101. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
332 
cotton industry which could be consumed in this country.”37 Maclean and many 
of his contemporaries did not see Mosley‟s home-market driven economy as 
possible for a small island such as Britain. Regaining Britain‟s export trade 
seemed the only option to restore the economy. As such, they remained hopeful 
that the export market would recover soon. Maclean‟s more optimistic 
prediction for Britain‟s trading future was a common thread amongst socialist 
politicians. They saw the existing economic system as damaged, but not 
irreparable.   
 
The wider implications of Mosley‟s suggested policies brought forth other 
criticisms. Liberal MP Frank Owen believed that the economic isolation Mosley 
emphasized was morally wrong. He declared that Mosley was ignoring the 
“responsibilities of civilization” in his 
proposals.
38 Owen believed Britain‟s status 
as a world power required that it maintain 
its involvement in world trade. Owen‟s 
opinion was understandable; Mosley‟s 
vision of Britain as a powerful self-sufficient 
Empire was a radical departure from 
contemporary Labour Party policy. The 
harmony of a free-trading world was an 
essential principle of Britain‟s Labour-led 
socialist government. Owen, as well as 
many other politicians, saw Mosley‟s form 
of economic nationalism as heretical to this 
vision.  
 
Some worried that this economic 
„insulation‟ could lead to international 
conflict. If every nation adopted Mosley‟s 
vision of self-sufficiency, competition 
would be inevitable. Critics such as Labour 
MP Fenner Brockway warned of this “dangerous leaning towards economic 
imperialism.”
39 In Labour ideology, any mention of imperialism was a serious 
accusation. The post-war generation of liberal thinkers equated imperialism with 
conflict. A return to imperialist policy was not only sacri- legious to socialism, 
but a guarantee of increased international rivalry. As such, many leftist politicians 
had difficulty separating Mosley’s economic ideas from this imperialistic context.  
                                                            
37 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, October 29, 1930 (London: Hansard), column 102. 
38 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, November 5, 1930 (London: Hansard), column 779. 
39 New Leader, July 18, 1930. 
Image Source: Wikipedia 
James Ramsay MacDonald, Prime Minister (1929-1935). 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
333 
In keeping with this skepticism, MacDonald and his Labour Government strictly 
adhered to orthodox economic policy, regarding any sort of deficit spending as 
heresy. MacDonald’s government instead focused on attempting to balance the 
budget in the face of enormous loss of revenue. In particular, MacDonald chose 
to cut unemployment benefits, a decidedly cruel measure given the national 
situation.
40 Despite the efforts of MacDonald‟s government, unemployment 
continued to rise, and the Labour Government fell in August of 1931, giving way 
to the National Government, a bipartisan coalition of Labour and Conservative.  
 
In contrast to Parliament‟s condemnation of Mosley‟s proposals, other nations 
enacted Keynesian policies. Perhaps most recognizable was Roosevelt‟s New 
Deal in the United States. Although Roosevelt entered office with the intent to 
balance the budget, he outlined plans for a new “emergency budget” which 
would necessarily run a large deficit.
41 Roosevelt used this emergency to finance 
his extensive public works programs during the First New Deal of 1933.42 While 
Roosevelt was skeptical of Keynesian ideas, he conceded to some deficit 
spending, though never at the level Keynes advocated.
43  
 
Mosley hoped to fight unemployment using the same concepts Roosevelt 
utilized. Mosley, however, was more of a pure Keynesian than Roosevelt, wholly 
embracing deficit spending and public works to aid economic recovery. In fact, 
in 1930 Mosley was perhaps more of a Keynesian than Keynes himself. Still, 
Mosley and Roosevelt shared some policy ideas. Mosley‟s suggestion to employ a 
government-funded mobile labor corps is almost exactly what Roosevelt did in 
1933. Roosevelt‟s Civilian Conservation Corps occupied a similar role, except 
that the focus was on the development and conservation of natural resources 
instead of urban renewal.
44 Regardless, the goal was the same: providing jobs for 
the unemployed that also benefited the public.   
 
The swift adoption of Roosevelt‟s New Deal policies just three years after The 
Mosley memorandum illustrates that Mosley‟s policies were not as outlandish as his 
political peers thought. Unfortunately for Mosley, the orthodox economic 
attitudes of his fellow politicians proved too entrenched, and his ideas were 
heavily criticized. Called “irresponsible” by Labour Prime Minister Ramsey 
MacDonald, Oswald Mosley’s fellow Labour MPs thoroughly rejected his 
                                                            
40 The Times, “Mr. MacDonald and Unemployment,” April 29, 1929, p. 9. 
41 William Edward Leuchtenberg, Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal 1932-1940 (New York: Harper and Row 
1963), 28. 
42 Which refers to the administrative initiatives introduced by Roosevelt in 1933. Specifically: the National Recovery 
Administration, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and the Civilian 
Conservation Corps.  
43 Ibid., 36. 
44 Ibid., 174. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
334 
response to the crisis.45 Parliament received with uncertainty Mosley’s plan for a 
more domestically based economy and increased government spending. Mosley‟s 
impatience with the Labour Party‟s stubborn refusal to employ alternative 
measures led to his decision to resign from the Labour Party in the spring of 
1930.  
 
Resignation from Labour  
n May 21, 1930, Oswald Mosley informed Parliament of his intention to 
leave the Labour Government. He withheld his formal justification for a 
scheduled unemployment debate a week later on May 28.46 On that day, Prime 
Minister of Labour Ramsey MacDonald fielded questions on his policies 
concerning the unemployment issue.
47 His speech was mostly a defense of the 
Labour Party’s policy of inaction during the recession. The House of Commons 
questioned his strategy. Winston Churchill MP demanded to know the details of 
extra spending over the budget, asking “What we want to know is, what is the 
extra amount over and above the normal?”
48 When MacDonald stutteringly 
claimed “I tell the Committee that I have not got those details,” the interruptions 
mounted.
49 Attempting to solidify his argument, MacDonald asked “Can we, in 
face of this special outburst of unemployment, this special manifestation of 
unemployment, undertake special emergency measures to tide it over?”
50 He 
then answered his own question, declaring that “every authority who has been 
consulted is convinced that it [the recession] is temporary.”
51 MacDonald 
asserted “we are just as likely to have a period of immediate boom as a very 
prolonged continuation of the present depression.”52 Murmurs of discontent 
abounded as MacDonald stepped down.53  
 
Following a few short comments by Robert Horne and Philip Snowden, Mosley 
rose to give his position,
54 Right away, Mosley challenged MacDonald by 
affirming the necessity for action, opening his speech with the maxim “the more 
serious the situation the greater the necessity for action by Government.”
55 
Mosley believed the current Government was incapable of meeting the crisis, 
                                                            
45 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, May 13, 1930 (London: Hansard), column 1607. 
46 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, May 28. 1930 (London: Hansard), column 1317. 
47 Ibid., column 1330. 
48 Ibid., column 1334. 
49 Ibid., column 1335. 
50 Ibid. 
51 Ibid. 
52 Ibid. 
53 Ibid. 
54 Ibid. 
55 Ibid., column 1348. 
O 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
335 
and  claimed that “to grapple with this problem it is necessary to have a 
revolution in the machinery of government.”56 The machine he wished to create 
echoed his memorandum: a “central organisation armed with an adequate research 
and economic advisory department on the one hand... operating under the direct 
control of the Prime Minister and the head of the Civil Service himself.”57  
 
He then shifted to the nature of the British economy. Citing changing world 
trade, he announced the need for the country to be “insulated” against the 
“electric shocks of world conditions,”
58 and declared that any “hope of recovering 
our position through an expansion of our export trade is an illusion.”59 In support 
of this assertion, he used the example of the British cotton trade in the Indian 
market.
60 According to the International Labour Office, Mosley quoted the 
average sale of British cotton in India at 5.6 billion square yards of cotton a 
year.
61 While India had traditionally been Britain‟s “exclusive market,” India now 
produced one billion square yards of its own, and Japan’s share in the market had 
grown tenfold from two percent to twenty percent.62 Mosley alleged the 
example showed how “the intensified competition all over the world is making 
more and more illusory the belief that we can again build up in the world that 
unique position which we occupied many years ago.”
63 Instead, Britain must “face 
a shift in the whole basis of the economic life of this country,” and “get away 
from the belief that the only criterion of British prosperity is how many goods we 
can send abroad for foreigners to consume.”
64 He ended by asking the 
government to “give the vital forces of this country the chance that they await.”65 
For a moment after he finished, there was silence. Then, “the cheering broke 
out, loud and prolonged, from every section of the House and galleries.”66 This 
brilliant but brief show of support for Mosley and his ideas emboldened him, 
urging him to forge onward towards political ruin.  
 
Over the next few days, the press passionately acclaimed Mosley’s speech. The 
Daily Herald called it “a brilliant defense of his attitude followed by a vigorous and 
detailed offensive.”67 The Evening Standard declared his oration “one of the most 
                                                            
56 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, May 28. 1930 (London: Hansard), column 1350. 
57 Ibid. 
58 Ibid., column 1352. 
59 Ibid., column 1353. 
60 Ibid. 
61 Ibid. 
62 Ibid. 
63 Ibid. 
64 Ibid., column 1354. 
65 Ibid., column 1372. 
66 Skidelsky, 216. 
67 Daily Herald, May 29, 1930. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
336 
notable Parliamentary speeches of recent times.”68 The Spectator complimented 
Mosley’s “perfect clearness and faultless taste.”69   
 
Following his resignation, Mosley was a political hero. The combination of his 
skill as an orator with the symbolic gesture of leaving the Labour Party seemed to 
win the admiration, if not agreement, of many. Much of Parliament applauded 
his bravery in leaving established politics and his powerful demonstration of his 
lack of confidence in Labour. He seemed to be the only politician to realize that 
the policies of a previous era would not fix the problems of this one. It was less 
the specifics of his ideas but simply his cry for action that resonated with many. 
Although much of Parliament certainly disagreed with his proposals, they 
disagreed far more with the Labour government’s frustrating inaction. Following 
his speech, Sir Richard Hopkins, controller of finance and supply at the Treasury, 
gave a report on Mosley’s views on the export crisis to different government 
departments.
70 Hopkins examined Mosley’s claim that regaining Britain‟s export 
trade would not be enough to return the British economy to full employment. 
Upon review of statistical evidence, he reluctantly agreed with this concept.
71 
The Board of Trade began to look into other strategies more in line with 
Mosley’s suggestions.
72  
 
Despite the acceptance of some of his ideas, Mosley lacked reliable political 
allies. Many agreed to a point with his short-term economic ideas, but his long 
term design for government and British trade policies fell flat. The Board of 
Trade, while surrendering to Mosley’s ideas in the short-term, believed that he 
“[appeared] to underestimate the potentialities in economic development” in 
undeveloped markets in Africa and Asia, which could provide more in the export 
trade.
73  In Parliament, he had only four supporters who remained in the Labour 
Party: W.J. Brown, Aneurin Bevan, Oliver Baldwin and Robert Forgan.74 These 
men all had talent politically; Aneurin Bevan, for example, went on to design 
Britain‟s national health care program following World War II. Still, all four 
were junior ministers having just entered the House in 1929.
75 Though capable 
and well-respected, they were too young to wield significant influence.  The 
momentum Mosley gathered following his resignation proved hard to maintain. 
Though his rhetoric led many to declare his status as a rising star, it remained 
                                                            
68 Evening Standard, May 29, 1930. 
69 Spectator, May 31, 1930. 
70 Howson and Winch, 27. 
71 Ibid 
72 Ibid 
73 Skidelsky, 219 
74 Mosley, My life, 249. 
75 Ibid. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
337 
unclear where he would fit. MacDonald‟s government was certainly in decline, 
but no one knew what would come next. Mosley found himself in the difficult 
position of being the object of admiration but not alliance. As an Independent 
MP in a chaotic House of Commons, he found much respect but little support 
for his ideas.  
 
Ideologically, Mosley felt himself a world apart from politicians he saw as mired 
in a “pre-war mind.” In a published statement in the Sunday Express, Mosley 
related his feeling that the essence of contemporary political division was not 
along party lines but in a difference in attitude.
76 The “modern mind” was a 
“hard, realistic type, hammered into existence on the anvil of great ordeal.”77 
The “pre-war mind” was a product of a “static” age, a “nicer” age.78 Mosley 
believed this difference in environment and upbringing created insurmountable 
ideological differences. It seemed that Mosley could not fathom the lack of 
support in his Labor compatriots with whom he shared much of his political 
background and ideas. Instead, he saw the rift as a sort of generation gap caused 
by the Great War, which rendered it such that individuals on either side could 
“scarcely understand each other’s language.”
79 The concept of “pre-war” ideas as 
opposed to “modern” ones was an essential aspect of Mosley’s ideology 
throughout his career. In these early years, Mosley identified the lethargy of the 
Labour Party and other political groups with the “pre-war” mentality. Later, he 
would extend this label to apply to the British parliamentary system as a whole. 
During his time with Labour, Mosley could not believe that his party could show 
such aversion to action, and blamed their lack of confidence in his proposals on 
the generation gap.  
 
Whatever the source of the ideological difference between Mosley and the rest of 
Labour, he found trouble gaining the support he needed. In Mosley’s first 
announcement of resignation on May 21, he warned MacDonald that he would 
“appeal to the judgment of our party.”
80 He hoped to create a new following 
outside the Party, and eventually to reenter it as the triumphant returning hero. 
To this end, Mosley organized a petition by sixty MPs to reevaluate the current 
policy on unemployment. When the motion came before the House in July, less 
than half of the party bothered to show up.
81 Those who did simply referred it 
back to a consultative committee by 80 votes to 38.82 It seemed he was destined 
                                                            
76 Sunday Express, June 4, 1930.    
77 Ibid. 
78 Ibid. 
79 Ibid. 
80 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, May 31, 1930 (London: Hansard), column 405. 
81 Skidelsky, 222. 
82 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
338 
to be treated as little more than a pesky annoyance by organized politics. By the 
end of the summer, Mosley had lost faith in the Labour Party.  
 
In his biography of Mosley, Robert Skidelsky posits that much of the Labour 
Party’s resistance to change lay in the nature of the organization. Labour was the 
traditional “party of rebellion,” most often in opposition.
83 Labour only surpassed 
the Liberal Party as the primary opposition to the Conservatives in the early 
1920’s, and assumed power in 1924. Skidelsky claims that Labour’s position in 
1930 left it reluctant to accept changes that could weaken its newfound political 
power. He asserts that this quality enforced a stricter sense of unity among the 
party.
84 As a result, a successful revolution within the Labour Party in 1931 may 
have been doomed from the outset.  
 
The New Statesman commented on this Labour attribute in September 1931, by 
stating “Persons with no inside knowledge of the Labour movement find it hard 
to understand how little influence of any individual counts against the sentiment 
of collective solidarity.”
85 This characteristic of the Labour party may have 
contributed to Mosley’s difficulties. As a younger Member of Parliament who 
spent the first six years of his tenure in the Conservative Party, Mosley may not 
have fully understood this aspect. Whether their disdain was because of lack of 
Labour‟s faith in Mosley and his policies or just the nature of the party, the 
apathy of his former Labour compatriots left Mosley with a deep resentment 
toward Labour politics. On February 28, 1931, sick with pneumonia and beyond 
frustration, Mosley announced the founding of the New Party.
86    
 
The New Party  
he rationale behind the New Party was the colossal failure on 
the part of both Labour and the Conservatives to react 
effectively to the “grave industrial crisis.”87 In February 1931, 
Oswald Mosley, his wife Cynthia Mosley, John Strachey, Oliver 
Baldwin, Robert Forgan and Allan Young all officially resigned from 
the Labour Party to form this new entity. Oliver Baldwin’s 
commitment lasted only one day before he abandoned Mosley and 
                                                            
83 Skidelsky, 223. 
84 Ibid. 
85 The New Statesman and Nation, September 5, 1931. 
86 Matthew Worley, “What Was the New Party? Sir Oswald Mosley and Associated Responses to the „Crisis‟,” History 
92, no. 305 (2007): 39. 
87 Oswald Mosley, John Strachey, Oliver Baldwin, Robert Forgan, Cynthia Mosley, W.E.D. Allen, Why we left the old 
parties (London: David Allen, 1931), 2. 
T 

Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
339 
rejoined Labour. W.J. Brown, a well-respected Labour politician, 
attached his name to the New Party program but remained with the 
Labour Party.   
 
The ideas Mosley touted in his memorandum comprised most of the official 
program of the New Party, A national policy: an account of the emergency 
programme.88 The programme expanded on some of his ideas for the reform of the 
structure of government, and declared the need to turn the House of Commons 
from a “talk-shop to a work shop.”89 Mosley wanted to endow a small inner 
council of six men with the ability to pass legislation by council order. This new 
executive body would allow for the initiation of Mosley’s reforms in a more 
expedient manner.  
 
The New Party also advocated the use of import controls to expand the domestic 
economy, as well as public works initiatives to create jobs. Mosley and his New 
Party hoped to “save and rebuild the nation” through an aggressive plan of deficit 
spending.
90 In The Times, Mosley stated the New Party’s intent to, “challenge the 
50-year-old system of free trade which exposes industry in the home market to 
the chaos of world conditions, such as price fluctuation, dumping, and the 
competition of sweated labour, which result in the lowering of wages and 
industrial decay.”
91  
 
Strategically, Mosley intended the New Party to be a short term reaction to the 
economic emergency. Mosley and his followers attempted to appeal across party 
lines in the name of saving the country from total disaster. They believed the 
extreme nature of the economic crisis necessitated a political order exclusively 
focused on economic reconstruction. However, the Labour background of 
Mosley and his followers inevitably cast the party in a certain light. Although 
some Conservative and Liberal MP‟s were sympathetic to the New Party‟s ideas, 
they were still understandably wary of leaving established politics.
92  
 
                                                            
88 Oswald Mosley, Allan Young, John Strachey, W.J., Brown, and Aneurin Bevan, A national policy: an account of the 
emergency programme advanced by Sir Oswald Mosley M.P (London: MacMillan, 1931), 1. 
89 Ibid., 7.  
90 Ibid., 5. 
91 The Times, March 2, 1931, p. 14. 
92 Worley, 46. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
340 
Mosley hoped that with the Conservative Party in dire straits, the New Party 
could become the party of opposition to the heavily criticized Labour 
government. In a bid to appeal to youth, Mosley founded the New Party Youth 
Clubs (NUPA), which enjoyed some success in mobilizing young British men 
into politics. Mosley also hoped to win over the increasingly disenfranchised 
Labour affiliates in the Independent Labour Party.  
 
One of the first of Mosley’s converts was Harold Nicolson, son of the diplomat 
Sir Arthur Nicolson. Harold Nicolson became nationally known through a 
successful career in journalism, most notably in the Daily Express and the BBC. 
With an eye towards Nicolson’s experience in journalism, Mosley appointed him 
the editor of the New Party’s periodical Action.
93 As a close friend of Mosley’s 
and a core member of the New Party, Nicolson’s perspective is invaluable in this 
period. With a talented nucleus of leaders, the future of the New Party seemed 
bright.  
 
However, the New Party faced many unforeseen issues. During much of 1931, 
Mosley suffered from pleurisy, a painful lung disease.
94 Largely confined to his 
bed, the illness forced Mosley to scale back his campaigning for the New Party. 
As a result, many potential supporters who came to New Party rallies hoping to 
see Mosley speak were instead treated to John 
Strachey, Robert Forgan or Lady Cynthia Mosley. 
Although they were all capable speakers, they did not 
possess Mosley’s star power. His resignation from 
Labour had made him a household name, and it was he 
who had the best chance of gathering support for the 
New Party. As such, his lack of visibility within the 
movement hurt the New Party’s recruiting abilities.   
 
W.J. Brown could have been a powerful force in the 
New Party. However, he opted to remain with the 
Labour Party. Although he had promised to resign, he 
claimed that he could not afford to lose his job with 
the trade unions which supported his candidacy.
95 
Brown stayed with Labour, despite his initial intent to 
resign with the other members of the New Party. 
After Mosley, Brown was the most influential New Party founder due to his 
                                                            
93 Nicolson and Nicolson, 83. 
94 Worley, 39. 
95 Mosley, My life, 283. 
Harold Nicolson and his wife Vita Sackville-West 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
341 
connections with the trade unions and the more radical Labour MPs. With 
Brown reluctant and Mosley deathly ill, the New Party was far from running at 
full strength.  
 
Inevitably, money also was a problem. Initially, the hugely wealthy automobile 
mogul Sir William Morris financed the New Party. Though not politically 
inclined, Morris worried at the state of Britain. He believed Mosley’s politics 
were a “ray of hope” for the creation of an “industrial party.” Morris believed in 
Mosley’s capability for leadership, and gave him 50,000 pounds after 
interrogating him at a luncheon.
96 Later, however, monetary concerns forced 
Mosley to constantly harangue wealthy radicals for support.  
 
Despite the New Party’s troubles, the political world did not wait for them. The 
first test of the New Party’s political viability was the by-election of the Ashton-
under-Lyne in April 1931. Following the death of Labour MP Albert Bellamy in 
March, the New Party stood for election in the constituency alongside Labour 
and Conservative candidates.
97 The New Party candidate, Allan Young, received 
4,472 votes to Labour’s 11,005 and Conservative’s 12,420.98  The Conservative 
victory in the election led to serious Labour bitterness towards Mosley for a 
perceived splitting of the Labour vote. Following the declaration of the results, 
an angry mob formed outside the Town Hall. They shouted at Mosley, calling 
him “traitor,” and “Judas.”
99 The son of the defeated Labour candidate charged 
the steps and accused Mosley with ruining his father’s chances.100 In response, 
Mosley turned to John Strachey and said “that is the crowd that has prevented 
anyone doing anything in England since the war.”
101 Strachey believed in that 
moment, Mosley began to set himself against the working class.102 John Strachey 
later claimed that was the moment British fascism was born.103   
 
 
shton-under-Lyne severed any positive link between Mosley and his New 
Party and Labour. First Lord of the Admiralty A.V. Alexander referred to 
the New Party as the “treacherous Mosley campaign.”
104 Bitterness over this 
siphoning of Labour voters ensured widespread distrust of the New Party by 
                                                            
96  Mosley, My life, 345. 
97  F.W.S Craig, British election results 1918- (London: MacMillan, 1977), 98. 
98  Ibid. 
99  Skidelsky, 252. 
100 John Strachey, The menace of Fascism, (New York: Covici, Friede Inc., 1933), 156. 
101 Ibid., 157. 
102 Ibid. 
103 Ibid. 
104 Skidelsky, 253. 
A 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
342 
Labour politicians. The opinion that the New Party had lost the election for 
Labour, was a misconception   the New Party’s supporters at Ashton-under- 
Lyne drew support from Liberal voters.105 As such, The New Party’s 
involvement in the election probably had little effect on the Conservative 
victory.  
 
The fall of Ramsey MacDonald’s Labour government in August 1931 had serious 
political consequences for the New Party. In August, MacDonald chose to form a 
coalition government with the Conservatives and Liberals rather than remain 
with the fading Labour government. When MacDonald’s new National 
Government stood for election in October of 1931, they took 556 of 616 seats in 
the House of Commons.
106 Of those 556, the Conservatives won 473 seats, 
indicating the degree of national frustration with the Labour Government.107 
MacDonald remained Prime Minister of this new coalition, but was expelled 
from the Labour Party. Labour won just a dismal 52 seats amongst powerful 
bitterness towards MacDonald as a traitor to the party.
108 MacDonald, as a true 
believer in Labour politics, was heartbroken by Labour’s downfall. However, it 
was his move to create the National Government that annihilated Labour’s 
position in government.  
 
In this political climate, Mosley’s New Party floundered as it lost the basis of its 
opposition. With much of the constituency the New Party hoped to win over 
now represented by the coalition, Mosley’s message fell on deaf ears. He could 
never have predicted the unlikely political situation at the end of 1931. 
MacDonald‟s leadership of the new National Government came only at the 
urging of the King. Mosley, like most of Britain, expected the Labour 
Government to fall. He hoped to use the New Party as a vehicle to gather the 
support of both frustrated Labour supporters and disenfranchised Conservatives. 
Mosley opposed the Labour Government through such measures as his petition 
to create a new unemployment policy in July of 1931.
109  However, MacDonald 
himself decimated the Labour Party by holding the election in October, close on 
the heels of the coalition’s establishment in August. Labour politics had no time 
to recover after the announcement of the coalition, and as a result lost 225 seats 
in Parliament.
110  
 
                                                            
105 Skidelsky, 255. 
106 Craig, 102. 
107 Ibid. 
108 Ibid. 
109 Skidelsky, 222. 
110 Craig, 102. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
343 
The short time frame before the election also hurt the New Party. Mosley had 
not expected the Labour Government to fall so suddenly, and was counting on 
more time to refine his party’s politics and gather support. Moreover, the 
National Government incorporated much of the constituency Mosley hoped to 
win; MacDonald had effectively appeased Conservative voters, leaving Mosley 
with nothing to offer them in terms of an alternative. The Socialists‟ distaste for 
Mosley’s economic policies, as well as anger over the outcome of Ashton-under-
Lyne ensured lack of support for Mosley from Labour politicians. By the final 
months of 1931, these circumstances crippled the New Party politically. With no 
support, the New Party failed to win a single seat of the fifty boroughs it stood 
in.
111 The general election of October 1931 saw the New Party win only 36,377 
votes nationwide, only one-fifth of one percent of the voting public.112   
 
At the beginning of 1932, Oswald Mosley had a serious political decision to 
make. He was a politician without a viable political party or even a seat in 
Parliament. He could retire from politics, as he had mused upon months earlier. 
In the late summer, Mosley had told friends that in the event of the New Party’s 
defeat he “would retire from public life for ten years.”
113 Still, he remained 
steadfastly convinced that Britain‟s economic crisis would only worsen. Others 
close to him did not share this opinion. Keynes told Mosley he believed Britain 
would recover soon.
114 But Mosley was preparing for an even greater national 
emergency than the economic one the New Party had hoped to solve. Soon, 
Mosley became convinced this crisis required an even more forceful political 
solution: fascism.   
 
II. The Early British Union of Fascists  
ollowing the New Party’s dismal performance in the October 1931 election, 
Mosley was looking for inspiration. In January 1932 he traveled to Italy at 
the behest of Benito Mussolini.115 The beleaguered politician instantly felt a 
kinship with Mussolini. Like Mosley, Mussolini’s political background was in 
socialist politics. Additionally, they had both grown weary of ineffectual 
legislative government. Mussolini’s success in revitalizing Italy (and Mosley‟s 
electoral failure) confirmed what Mosley was already beginning to believe: the 
age of democracy was over. Shortly after his return from Italy in January, Mosley 
                                                            
111 Craig, 102.  
112 Ibid. 
113 Nicolson and Nicolson, 88. 
114 Ibid.  
115 Mosley, My life, 358. 
F 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
344 
began work on a new campaign based upon the development of a specifically 
British form of fascism, one that would be unveiled the following autumn.116  
 
Fascism was not Mosley’s only recourse in early 1932. His undeniable appeal to 
youth was still widely considered an important political asset. As such, Mosley 
had a number of political options. David Lloyd George, former Prime Minister 
and the leader of the ailing Liberal Party, hoped to utilize Mosley in forming an 
opposition to the National Government.
117 Winston Churchill, disenfranchised 
by his Conservative Party, offered to support Mosley’s candidacy in a by-
election.118 Conservative chief whip David Margesson wanted to bring him into 
the National Government coalition.119 Even the estranged Labour Party made 
some effort; MP Joseph Kenworthy reached out to Mosley about rejoining 
Labour.
120  Mosley’s continuing desirability to British politicians illustrated the 
faith many still had in him, even after the New Party disaster. His charisma and 
political skill was enough to outweigh the sequence of alienating decisions he had 
made since resigning from Labour. To older politicians such as Churchill and 
Lloyd George, he was still a fresh young face with the capacity for leadership. 
They characterized the New Party as a young man’s folly, not a career ending 
catastrophe. Because of their long tenure on the political scene, Churchill and 
Lloyd George both hoped to use Mosley to refresh their political image.  
 
Outside of established politics, fascism was not the only alternative ideology. 
John Strachey, Mosley’s compatriot in the New Party and a primary contributor 
to the New Party’s economic program moved seamlessly towards communism 
following his break with Mosley in July 1931. Mosley, however, deeply despised 
communism. He felt that communism inevitably led to the destruction of a 
nation’s productivity. While he later strongly advocated for a corporate state, he 
rejected the essential Marxist tenet of class conflict. He believed class conflict led 
only to violent revolution, to the detriment of national industry and production. 
He could not accept Communism’s reliance on economic and social collapse as a 
catalyst for change. Instead, he argued for the creation of “equality of oppor- 
tunity,” which he believed fascism could provide.
121 Mosley did not want to 
destroy capitalism, he wanted to reform it.  
 
                                                            
116 Nicolson and Nicolson, 89.  
117 Skidelsky, 285. 
118 Ibid. 
119 Ibid. 
120 Nicolson and Nicolson, 115. 
121 Mosley, My life, 325. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
345 
Even political retirement would not have been an outlandish decision. In the late 
summer, Mosley had declared that if the New Party failed he would “retire from 
public life for ten years.”122 As he rightly pointed out, he could “well afford to 
wait ten years, to study economics, and even then when I return I shall be no 
older than Bonar Law was when he first entered politics.
123 Mosley was a 
talented man with a good deal of wealth; he had no practical need for politics. At 
just 36 years old he was still young by British political standards. His longing for 
a more “civilized life” outside of politics was understandable, and many in his 
position might have done so.
124   
 
However, by the autumn of 1931, Mosley’s attitude changed. After the New 
Party‟s dismal showing in the October general election, he published this 
ultimatum in the New Party’s political newspaper Action:  
 
Better the great adventure, better the great attempt for England‟s 
sake, better defeat, disaster, better far the end of that trivial thing 
called a political career, than stifling in a uniform of blue and gold, 
strutting and posturing on the stage of little England, amid the 
scenery of decadence, until history, in turning over an heroic page 
of the human story, writes of us the contemptuous postscript: 
„These were the men to whom was entrusted the Empire of Great 
Britain, and whose idleness, ignorance and cowardice left it a 
Spain.‟ 
We shall win; or at least we shall return upon our 
shields.125 
   
Despite the New Party‟s electoral failure, Mosley’s determination was 
unwavering. He felt that to leave politics would be to abandon his country. 
Without powerful change and leadership in this “crisis,” Britain would surely be 
left to deteriorate into “a Spain.”
126 By this point, however, Mosley’s feelings of 
disenfranchisement with established politics were irreconcilable. Labour, 
Conservative, Liberal or New, he believed existing party politics to be incapable 
of effecting change. His disillusionment was consistent with his ideas on the 
generation divide between the “modern man” and the “pre-war man.” Mosley 
saw the entire existing British political system as part of that anachronistic “pre-
war” mindset, and that there could be no solution to “the crisis” within such a 
system.   
 
                                                            
122 Nicolson and Nicolson, 88. 
123 Ibid. 
124 Ibid. 
125 Action, December 31, 1931, p. 2. 
126 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
346 
Mosley’s enthusiasm for military grandeur also pushed him towards fascism. His 
wartime experience had lent him a powerful appreciation for structure and 
discipline. The martial efficiency present in fascism appealed to him. Harold 
Nicolson, in discussing Mosley, wrote “Tom cannot keep his mind off shock 
troops, the arrest of MacDonald and J.H. Thomas, their internment in the Isle of 
Wight and the roll of drums around Westminster. He is a romantic. That is a 
great failing.”
127 Mosley’s pride could not bear the disgrace of remaining within a 
political system he had no faith in. He felt that to remain in party politics would 
be to “place himself in a strait-waistcoat.”
128 Instead, he chose to completely 
eschew British political principles in favor of fascism.  
 
 
osley was deeply impressed with the achievements he saw during his visit 
to Italy. He did not, however, view Mussolini himself as an exceptional 
individual. Mosley characterized him as “affable but unimpressive.”
129 If anything, 
Mosley considered himself the more able leader and politician. The Italian 
government represented everything Mosley hoped to achieve in Britain. In the 
Daily Mail, Mosley praised the new regime: “No time is wasted in the polite 
banalities which have so irked the younger generation in Britain when dealing 
with our elder statesmen.”
130 The new Italian mind, he wrote, was “hard, 
concentrated, direct    in a word, „Modern‟.”131  “Modern” was perhaps the 
highest form of praise from Mosley. He saw the Italian system as the 
embodiment of what twentieth century government should be. Mosley believed 
the improved efficiency and capability of the Italian fascist system more than 
compensated for the loss of the “right to blather” so valued by traditional British 
politics.
132 In contrast, the same fascist system horrified his travel companion 
Harold Nicolson.133  
 
As Mosley began to embrace fascism, his views on the approaching “crisis” 
adjusted. He no longer foresaw a fantastic implosion of British government, 
economy and trade but rather a slow, painful decline. As he wrote in the Political 
Quarterly, he predicted a “slow and imperceptible decline, until in the course of a 
generation or two, Britain had degenerated into the position of a Spain.”
134 
Similar to his battle cry in Action six months before, the concept of a British 
                                                            
127 Nicolson and Nicolson, 88. 
128 Ibid., 92. 
129 Ibid., 88. 
130 Daily Mail, February 1, 1932. 
131 Ibid. 
132 Ibid. 
133 Nicolson and Nicolson, 86. 
134 Oswald Mosley, “Old Parties or New?” Political Quarterly 3, no. 1 (1932): 28. 
M 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
347 
decline “into the position of a Spain” was a terrifying image. Spain’s painful fall 
from colonial superpower to a nation racked by political strife and poverty was 
familiar to most Britons. The aversion of this national breakdown became 
Mosley’s rallying call.  
 
During this time Mosley viewed fascism largely as a means to enact his economic 
ideas. It was only in later years that Mosley began to see fascism as necessary in 
and of itself. Although he believed in the need for a restructured British state, 
fascism remained largely a vehicle for his unique vision of the British economy. 
This home-market driven, self-sufficient, imperial entity was the only way to 
prevent Britain‟s collapse into “a Spain.”
135 Mosley’s adoption of fascism was a 
direct result of his belief that his economic ideas could never be implemented 
through the existing government structure. He had worked to enact these ideas 
since early 1930, first from within Labour and then from the New Party. 
Unfortunately, the “pre-war mind” was too ingrained in the British political 
system to ever allow for the revolutionary change Mosley thought Britain 
needed. As such, Mosley believed an entirely new, modern form of government 
was the only way to enact meaningful change. To Mosley, fascism was that 
government. It was the only option left to the “modern man.” 
 
 
osley told Harold Nicolson at the last New Party meeting in April 1932 
that he believed as “leader of the fascists, he could accomplish more than 
as a party-backbencher,” and that he was “prepared to run the risk of further 
failure, ridicule and assault, rather than allow the active forces in this country to 
fall into other hands.”
136 Nicolson told Mosley that he could not support fascism. 
He begged Mosley to “lie low” and advocate for the “corporate state idea” outside 
of fascism.
137 Mosley politely refused.138   
 
Nicolson was not the first of Mosley’s colleagues to leave over ideological 
differences, nor would he be the last. John Strachey and Allan Young had 
quarreled with Mosley over the New Party’s intended foreign policy in July 
1931.
139 Strachey and Young wrote a foreign policy memorandum emphasizing 
“close economic relations” with the Soviet Union.140 Mosley pointed out that a 
friendly trade policy with Russia contradicted existing British policy.141 As such, 
                                                            
135 Mosley, “Old Parties or New?” 28. 
136 Nicolson and Nicolson, 94. 
137 Skidelsky, 287. 
138 Nicolson and Nicolson, 86. 
139 Ibid. 
140 The Times, “Political Notes; The Shrinking New Party,” July 24, 1931, p. 14. 
141 Strachey, 159. 
M 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
348 
it was guaranteed to cost the New Party support from the political 
establishment.142 He believed advocating improved relations with Russia to be a 
waste of potential support over an unimportant point. Mosley had no desire to 
ally the New Party with Communist interests. Even worse, the memorandum 
was contradictory to the New Party’s isolationist economic goals. Strachey and 
Young wished to downplay the importance of commerce within the Empire in 
favor of trading with Russia.
143 This clearly conflicted with Mosley’s plans for a 
self-sufficient imperial economic system.  
 
The resulting argument between the three men left each angry and bitter. 
Strachey and Young resigned from the New Party three days later, claiming that 
Mosley “was adopting a fascist tendency.”
144 They believed that aspects of the 
Party such as the NUPA youth movement were headed towards fascism.145 
Strachey accused Mosley of harboring fascist ideas as early as Ashton-under-
Lyne.
146 Harold Nicolson’s diaries gave some credence to this accusation. Even 
before the October 1931 General Election, Mosley was beginning to discuss 
fascism.
147 On September 22, Nicolson wrote that Mosley believed the crisis 
would bring a “rapid and immense” surge in communist interest.148 Mosley 
mused with Nicolson over whether this surge could be countered by fascism.149 
John Strachey wrote in his 1933 book, The menace of Fascism, that following the 
New Party’s failure at the April 1931 Ashton-under-Lyne by-election “Mosley 
began more and more to use the word Fascism in private.”150   
 
Mosley’s wife Cynthia resented her husband’s gravitation towards fascism. 
During the New Party campaigns, Cynthia had been a key member of the 
movement. Her glamorous image and friendly demeanor had helped the New 
Party win over female members. Politically inexperienced but kind-hearted, she 
was remarkable in helping to lead the party during her husband’s pleurisy. 
However, when he began to lean towards fascism following the October 1931 
election, she was not as supportive. Cynthia was a staunch social democrat who 
believed that the duty of politics was to protect the rights of the working class. 
Fascism disgusted her. After Mosley’s visit to Italy, Cynthia warned her husband 
that she would issue notice to the press removing herself from his politics.
151 
                                                            
142 Strachey, 159. 
143 Skidelsky, 260. 
144 The Times, “Political Notes; The Shrinking New Party,” p. 14. 
145 Ibid 
146 Strachey, 158. 
147 Nicolson and Nicolson, 84. 
148 Ibid. 
149 Ibid. 
150 Strachey, 157. 
151 Skidelsky, 284. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
349 
Although it proved to be an idle threat, Cynthia never again fully embraced her 
husband’s political agenda.  
 
Mosley kept the New Party alive only in name in the months following the April 
meeting, instead devoting his energy toward writing the outline of his new fascist 
ideas in the form of the book. During this time he decided to combine the NUPA 
Youth Movement with the existing fascist organizations in Britain, and debated 
what to call this new movement. Initially, he hesitated to label it as fascist. 
Robert Forgan and W.E.D. Allen counseled against using the term, arguing that 
it was too foreign.
152 Still, Mosley overruled his colleagues, and founded his 
movement as the British Union of Fascists. Four years later, in Fascism-100 
questions asked and answered, Mosley gave his reasoning for his choice of words:  
 
Fascism is the name by which the modern Movement has come to 
be known in the world. It would have been possible to avoid 
misrepresentation by calling our Movement by another name. But 
it was more honest to call it Fascism and thus to let everyone 
know exactly where we stood. It is up to us to defeat 
misrepresentation by propaganda and explanation of the real 
policy and method of Fascism as it will operate in Britain. In the 
long run straightforward dealing is not only honest but also pays 
best.
153  
 
Initial BUF Policy: The Greater Britain  
ublished in conjunction with the founding of the British Union of Fascists in 
October 1932, The greater Britain, first published in conjunction with the 
BUF’s founding in October 1932, outlined the BUF‟s ideology. In his work, he 
logically explained his arguments for a new fascist state to the British people. His 
ideas were very much grounded in practical concerns such as wages, 
unemployment and the economy. Despite Mosley’s rationalization of the need 
for fascism, the creation of the BUF severely damaged his public image. 
Bitterness and desperation stemming from the BUF‟s failure would lead to its 
radicalization in later years.  
 
Still, it is important to understand the BUF‟s policies as Mosley originally 
intended, in order to serve as a contrast to its later incarnation. With The greater 
Britain, Mosley presented his concept of fascism as adopted to fit the needs of the 
                                                            
152 Skidelsky, 284. 
153 Oswald Mosley, Fascism  100 Questions Asked and Answered, (London: BUF Publications, 1936), 8. 
P 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
350 
United Kingdom. He hoped to remove the negative connotation of fascism 
through a logical explanation of his vision of a fascist Britain. For example, he 
made clear in The greater Britain that fascism was not synonymous with 
despotism.
154 His concept of fascism entailed a “Dictatorship” still beholden to 
the people through legislative assembly.155 He also attempted to debunk the idea 
that a fascist state could only be achieved through violence. Instead, he argued 
for the implementation of fascism through established political channels. This 
point is especially significant, as Mosley later embraced the prospect of violence. 
The greater Britain represented a softer form of fascism, intended to gently 
convince rather than force the cooperation of the British people. This form of 
fascism emphasized the protection of individual rights as well as much of the 
existing political system.  
 
In addition to attempting to remove the stigma from fascist ideology, Mosley 
outlined in detail his arguments for why fascism was essential to Great Britain‟s 
future success. To this end, he asserted that the current economic crisis served as 
“tragic proof that economic life has outgrown our political institutions.”
156 He 
believed that the current “system of government designed by, and for, the 
nineteenth century” could not succeed in the modern world.
157 This concept of a 
“fascist century” echoed Mussolini’s essay The doctrine of Fascism written earlier in 
1932.158 Mosley agreed with Mussolini’s assertion that “If the XIXth century was 
the century of the individual (liberalism implies individualism) we are free to 
believe that this is the "collective" century, and therefore the century of the 
State.”
159 
 
Mosley argued that the needs of a new world economy far outstripped the 
capability of the existing political system. Political parties created the tendency of 
Parliament to indulge “in detailed debate of every technical measure,” leading to 
inordinately slow policy-making.
160 Mosley believed the “modern age” required 
government to act quickly and decisively. Within the existing Parliamentary 
two-party system, this was admittedly often impossible. Mosley held that the 
solution to the economic crisis lay not with the Right or the Left, but with an 
entirely new entity: fascism.  
 
                                                            
154 Oswald Mosley, The greater Britain, (London: Jeffcoats, 1932), 23. 
155 Ibid. 
156 Ibid., 17. 
157 Ibid. 
158 Benito Mussolini, Fascism: doctrine and institutions (Rome: Ardita, 1932), 1. 
159 Ibid., 7. 
160 Mosley, The greater Britain, 29. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
351 
Much as he advocated with the New Party, Mosley urged his country to ignore 
these party lines in support of his new movement. He characterized the political 
Right as the party of stability, and the Left as the party of progress.161 The 
unfortunate consequence of this separation was that it was impossible to achieve 
both ends at the same time. Mosley held that fascism was the natural solution to 
this dilemma. However, he carefully noted that “Fascism in not Dictatorship in 
the old sense of that word, which implies Government against the will of the 
people.”
162 Rather, Dictatorship simply meant strong leadership, without 
tyranny. He asserted that “modern Dictatorship” is “Leadership resting on the 
enthusiastic acceptance of the people, and could not endure without their 
support.”
163 In Mosley’s system, this form of Dictatorship was to be embodied in 
a powerful executive figure called “The Minister.” This person was to be 
responsible for most of the government, but not in a despotic sense. As an 
example, Mosley turned to Mussolini: “We are solemnly assured that the 
Government of Mussolini is a Dictatorship against the will of the Italian people, 
but when he appeared before them in his tour of the country during the tenth 
anniversary of his government he was accorded probably the greatest popular 
reception ever given to an individual in the history of the world.”
164 Mosley 
attempted to eliminate some of the stigma from terms such as “fascism” and 
“dictatorship,” and cast them in a more positive light.  
 
In The greater Britain, Mosley’s plan for achieving a fascist state was remarkably 
orthodox. Mosley believed violent revolution should be avoided, and his visit to 
Italy further confirmed this belief. Nicolson paraphrased Mussolini’s advice to 
Mosley as a warning “not to try the military stunt in England.”
165 Instead, 
Mosley’s approach to gaining power emphasized “loyalty to the crown.”166 He 
wanted to achieve fascism by the simple method of gaining a parliamentary 
majority at election.
167 With this accomplished, “government will be drastically 
altered by the legal constitutional means to which we adhere, in order to provide 
the effective instruments of government and of action which modern problems 
demand.”
168 Mosley explicitly indicated that his movement would work through 
the current political system. In this way, he was able to silence possible 
accusations of intending violent revolution.  
 
                                                            
161 Mosley, The greater Britain, 24. 
162 Ibid., 26. 
163 Ibid. 
164 Ibid., 27. 
165 Nicolson and Nicolson, 88. 
166 Mosley, The greater Britain, 39. 
167 Ibid. 
168 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
352 
These alterations included a retooling of the present House of Commons. Mosley 
believed that the inherent fault with the present Parliamentary system lay in the 
nature of the electoral system. Instead of judging candidates on their ability to 
lead or their technical expertise, constituents voted for those who demonstrated 
“assiduity in opening local charity bazaars,” or “lung power at street corners.”
169 
Representatives therefore focused on achieving success in the political game. As 
such, they often did not possess the effective technical knowledge needed to 
make policy decisions. In a “vastly technical age,” Mosley believed that this old 
system of politics was unworkable.
170   
 
Following a BUF victory in the election, the new fascist MPs were to be 
appointed as “executive officers” of their constituencies.171 They would then step 
down from the Commons in order to serve this function. A “locally elected 
Counsel” would assist these officers in fairly governing their communities.
172 
These officers and their counsels would allow for more direct and efficient 
handling of local affairs. This contrasted with the existing system, where MPs 
often had little or no contact with their constituencies.
173 Mosley wanted to 
increase the level of accountability in local politics. He hoped that by making 
local government more accountable, small-scale issues could be more easily dealt 
with.   
 
Once this new Parliamentary system was in place, the House of Commons would 
be reformed into a new entity. Voting would be run through what Mosley called 
“the Occupational Franchise.”
174 This entailed citizens voting for candidates based 
on their profession to represent their profession; “A steel worker will vote as a 
steel worker; a doctor as a doctor.”175 In this way, Mosley believed that a voter 
would be able to select a representative based upon a “lifelong experience of the 
trade in which he is engaged, instead of an “amateur knowledge of foreign and 
domestic politics.”
176 Mosley considered most of the problems of the modern age 
to be technical, not political. The “Occupational Franchise” ensured that 
representatives would have the necessary knowledge to deal with these technical 
issues. This new version of Parliament would be an amalgam of national 
industry, able to work together to promote the real end of government: 
                                                            
169 Mosley, The greater Britain, 28. 
170 Ibid. 
171 Ibid., 40. 
172 Ibid. 
173 Ibid., 41. 
174 Ibid., 42. 
175 Ibid. 
176 Ibid., 43. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
353 
economic growth. The main function of this new body would be to advise the 
minister on technical issues.  
 
In addition to reforming the Commons, Mosley suggested the elimination of the 
House of Lords, pronouncing it an “unworkable anachronism.”
177 Many of 
Mosley’s contemporaries agreed with him on this point. The House of Lords had 
been essentially powerless since an act of Parliament in 1911, stripping it of all 
but the ability to delay bills for a short time.
178 Mosley hoped to rid Parliament of 
the Lords and replace it with a more constructive institution. In The greater 
Britain, he suggested completely disposing of the House of Lords in favor of a 
new “Second Chamber.”179 This new Chamber was to be composed of “specialists 
and men of wide general knowledge” and was intended to serve in an advisory 
capacity to the Commons.
180 Mosley hoped to fill this Chamber with experts 
representing every interest, from each of the colonies to religious institutions to 
trade unions. These specialists were meant to advise the Commons on matters 
pertaining to their expertise. In addition to its specialist role, this Chamber was 
also to be responsible for non-technical subjects such as foreign policy.
181 This 
reflected Mosley’s sense of priorities. To him, industry was the driving force 
behind the country’s success. Matters of foreign policy fell by the wayside in his 
dream of a self-sustaining industrial utopia. These two new branches of 
Parliament were to provide expert advice for the Minister, while leaving the 
actual decision making to the Minister himself.   
 
Mosley believed that the new legislative system “would provide an executive 
instrument to implement the nation’s demand for rapid action while retaining 
the principle of elected representation in every element of national life.”182 He 
emphasized that fascism would not mean the end of elected representation. 
Under his system, Britain could still have elected representation, without the 
snail’s pace of legislative policy-making. Mosley hoped to convince the nation 
that his system presented an ideal compromise between the democracy of 
representative democracy and the efficiency of pure dictatorship.  
 
Mosley included other measures to assuage fears of despotism. Specifically, he 
alleged that the Minister was not unimpeachable. At least every five years, there 
would be a nationwide referendum for the continuance of the Minister and the 
                                                            
177 Mosley, The greater Britain, 41. 
178 The New York Times, Feb. 23, 1911. 
179 Mosley, The greater Britain, 41 
180 Ibid. 
181 Ibid. 
182 Ibid.  
intersections            Autumn 2010 
354 
government.183 If the Minister was deposed, the King was responsible for 
appointing a new Minister who he believed “the nation will show confidence in a 
fresh vote.”184 In this way, Mosley demonstrated his “loyalty to the Crown” by 
restoring part of the King’s traditional powers.185 Mosley hoped to assuage 
popular fear that a fascist state would lead to a tyrannical regime. To combat this 
fear, his system entailed a powerful executive Minister still beholden to the 
approval of the people and the King. He thus illustrated that a fascist government 
fixated on economic growth need not be a despotic one.  
 
To achieve this growth, Mosley advocated for the necessity of the “corporate 
state.” He borrowed this concept from Italian fascism. The Italian Corporate 
system or “Corporativismo” mostly allowed for private industry, but intervened 
in the interest of the state when necessary. As Mussolini wrote in Fascism: doctrine 
and institutions, “State intervention in economic production arises only when 
private initiative is lacking or insufficient, or when the political interests of the 
State are involved.”
186 The goal of Corporativismo was to harness the success of 
capitalism and use it for the good of the state. Mosley elaborated on his idea of 
fascist capitalism in 1936, explaining “Capitalism is the system by which capital 
uses the Nation for its own purposes. Fascism is the system by which the Nation 
uses capital for its own purposes.”
187 In this way, the government would take 
over struggling industries and attempt to make them productive, while leaving 
successful industries to continue their achievement. Mosley’s version of the 
corporate state was very similar. He believed the only permanent solution to 
unemployment was to use government to maximize the potential of industry. 
However, wholesale industrial nationalization was not the goal as in Communist 
Russia. As in Italy, Mosley wanted to use state planning only to maximize 
productivity. However, Mosley also emphasized maintaining wages, in line with 
his concept of a new home-market based economy. He hoped to increase the 
efficiency of national industry using government-led expertise, and in doing so 
create high wages. These higher wages would increase the purchasing power of 
British consumers. This would then allow British industry to center on the home 
market, as Mosley had advocated since 1930. The result was to be a self-
sufficient nation, capable of huge production as well as consumption, impervious 
to international economic fluctuation.  
 
                                                            
183 Mosley, The greater Britain, 163. 
184 Ibid., 43. 
185 Ibid., 39. 
186 Mussolini, Fascism: doctrine and institutions, 135. 
187 Mosley, Fascism  100 Questions, 17. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
355 
Mosley outlined the specifics of this corporate state in The greater Britain. A 
system of organizations labeled the “National Council of Corporations” would 
advise the government as to the specifics of the “Protective System.”188 The 
Council would be responsible for handling the details of the protectionist 
economy. The trade policies of individual industries could then be constantly 
adjusted to fit changing circumstances. This would allow leaders and experts in 
their respective industries a more effective say in their own policies.   
 
Each Corporation within the Council would be responsible for its own affairs. 
The Corporations would be comprised of representatives from both workers and 
consumers in order to ensure the “dual objective” of “good wages and low 
prices.”
189 These Corporations were to be self governing, except in the case of 
irresolvable conflict. In this case, the greater Council would step in, eliminating 
the need for worker strikes.
190 The principle of “industrial self-government” was 
to provide permanent machinery for national protectionism.191 Mosley hoped to 
not only alleviate the current economic crisis, but to install a system where 
future catastrophe could be avoided.  
 
To Mosley, fascism was as much a “new conception of life” as a political 
system.192 This new conception stressed action and responsiveness, bravery and 
youth. The enemy of modernity was the “Old Gang” of established politics, who 
had since World War I “surrendered Britain‟s power and greatness.”193 Mosley 
hoped to “raise the standard of youth” to “challenge that betrayal” of old party 
politics.194 Mosley’s movement intended to sway the young by emphasizing a 
patriotic, energetic mentality. Frustrated with the lethargy of the existing 
government, Mosley hoped they would rally around something new and 
energetic.   
 
In ideology and in policy, Mosley’s initial concept of fascism was not particularly 
outlandish. Although clearly a radical proposal, the fascist system outlined in The 
greater Britain still hoped to accommodate much of the British political system. 
Mosley’s rationale was simple; the British economy needed to be restructured. 
The economy could not be effectively reformed without the corporate state, and 
the corporate state could not be instituted through the existing government. 
                                                            
188 Mosley, The greater Britain, 113. 
189 Ibid. 
190 Ibid., 114. 
191 Ibid., 113. 
192 Ibid., 178. 
193 Ibid. 
194 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
356 
Therefore, the “modern” fascist state was the only way to restructure the 
economy. Mosley presented his argument for fascism as a simple necessity to 
regain and preserve Britain‟s economic superiority.   
 
In contrast to the later BUF, Mosley’s concept of British fascism in The greater 
Britain was far from an autocratic regime. He still wanted to include an elected 
Parliament, as well as some checks on the Minister’s authority. He even 
promised continued freedom of the press.195 Despite the relative timidity of 
Mosley’s idea of fascism, most still saw it as unworkable. However, he did 
receive support from some unexpected sources.  
 
Early Reactions to the BUF  
arold Nicolson wrote a letter to Mosley on May 20, 1932, a month after he 
had left Action and removed himself from Mosley’s politics.196 In reference 
to the BUF, he warned Mosley that “it is always the more active element which 
colours the whole.”197 His warning proved to be prophetic. It was not Mosley’s 
carefully outlined fascist policies or his vision of an industrial utopia which 
eventually garnered attention. It was a reputation for violence at rallies that 
became the BUF‟s trademark. At early rallies, groups of strong young men 
served as stewards. When people came to heckle Mosley, these men were 
responsible for ensuring the continuance of the rally, often by forcibly removing 
the offenders. After the introduction of the BUF‟s black uniform, the stewards 
became popularly known as “Blackshirts.” Mosley’s Blackshirt stewards were 
instrumental in maintaining order at BUF rallies. However, the public perceived 
them as little more than violent thugs.   
 
In his autobiography, Mosley claimed that his “thugs” were necessary to prevent 
disruptions at BUF rallies.198 Still, as more angry people came to rallies to start 
trouble, Mosley‟s men became known for their fighting ability. Tough, athletic 
young men began policing public BUF events, dressed in the “Blackshirt” 
uniform. Their slogan: “We never start fights, we only finish them.”199 This 
alarmed many Britons, who began to perceive the BUF as an actual fighting 
force. Mosley claimed that this was never his intention.200 However, the growing 
preponderance of the Blackshirt uniform proved intimidating. Mosley‟s 
                                                            
195 Mosley, The greater Britain, 51. 
196 Skidelsky, 288. 
197 Nicolson and Nicolson, 94. 
198 Mosley, My life, 304. 
199 Ibid. 
200 Ibid. 
H 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
357 
Blackshirt police force became a highly visible aspect of the movement. 
Increasingly, the BUF resembled an army more than a political group.   
 
This characterization of the BUF as a paramilitary organization was questionable, 
but popular. The British press accused Mosley of intending a violent revolution. 
The February 25, 1933 edition of the Daily Star accused Mosley of being “ready 
to take over the government the aid of machine-guns when the moment 
arrived.”
201 The quote had been taken out of context; Mosley had stated in the 
Mosley promptly responded with a libel suit against the Daily Star, which he won 
to the tune of five thousand pounds.202 The judge described him as “a public man 
of no mean courage, no little candour and no mean ability.”203 This case 
illustrates that in the first year of the movement, Mosley still had the respect, if 
not agreement, of much of the country. Still, his image was slowly evolving from 
talented but eccentric to dangerous and reactionary.  
 
 
III. The Marginalization of the BUF 1932-1937  
n its early years, most Britons saw the British Union of Fascists as a relatively 
harmless entity. Mosley, although a political outsider, still enjoyed the 
lifestyle of a young party politician, spending much of his time attending upper-
crust London social functions. Although his fellow politicians viewed him as 
radical politically, he had not yet developed the image which would completely 
alienate him. As such, much of the London high class still welcomed him. 
Londoners knew of his enthusiasm for high society pleasures, which reached new 
heights during this period. On the way to Italy in January 1932 Mosley and 
Nicolson spent a few nights in Paris. Mosley‟s nightlife shocked Nicolson during 
the trip. He observed that Mosley one night “had spent réveillon at the Fabre-
Luces and had been kept up doing the jeux de société till 8 a.m.”
204 It was evident 
that Mosley‟s changing political attitudes to this point had little effect on his 
social life.  
 
It was partly this reputation for pleasure-seeking that encouraged many not to 
take him seriously. For those in this camp, fascism appeared to be merely the 
latest trend for Mosley. Having switched from Conservative to Labour to 
Independent and then to the New Party in just twelve years, many thought the 
                                                            
201 Daily Star, February 25, 1933. 
202 The Times ,June 27, 1934. 
203 Evening News, November 7, 1934. 
204 Nicolson and Nicolson, 87. 
I 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
358 
new fascist experiment would be short-lived. His reputation as a playboy in the 
tabloids contributed to this assumption. The Communist newspaper The Daily 
Worker disparagingly commented on a picture of the Mosley‟s at a glamorous 
dinner, remarking “the above picture of Fascists at play should remove once and 
for all any lingering doubt as to the superman nature of Mosleyini, self-cast for 
the role of future dictator of Britain.”
205  
 
Despite this reputation, Mosley retained some political respectability. In the 
early days of fascism there was no lack of venues for him to speak at, and he was 
often invited to publicly discuss fascism with prominent politicians and 
intellectuals.  On March 16, 1933 he was even invited to debate fascism with 
Megan Lloyd George over B.B.C. radio, where he defended his views 
commendably against fierce critics.
206 BUF rallies were also initially held in high 
profile locations. The BUF held its founding rally on October 15, 1932 at 
Trafalgar Square in the heart of London, with only mild disruption.
207 Mosley‟s 
politics, although certainly radical, were not perceived as threatening by most 
Britons. As such, he conducted the business of promoting the BUF with little 
organized resistance.   
 
The BUF itself contributed to this non-threatening image. In the early years, the 
movement placed a large emphasis on athleticism.208 Young fascists spent much 
of their time playing quintessentially English sports such as rugby.209 This 
demonstration of traditional British masculinity was disarming; by playing sports, 
the early fascists seemed more akin to a youth athletics club than a military 
movement. Also conspicuously absent in the early days was the “Blackshirt” 
uniform. Mosley himself did not don the much vilified Blackshirt until late in 
1933. Without a uniform, it was therefore difficult to envision the movement as 
a military force. Due to this perception, the public initially received the BUF 
with curiosity instead of disgust. A later government Mass Observation study by 
Tom Harrison found that most British citizens “regarded him as a colorful 
eccentric, and fascist occasions as entertaining spectacles.”
210 In the early 1930s, 
Mosley‟s alienation did not extend beyond the political sphere. To the average 
Briton, Mosley and his movement was more an interesting conversation piece 
than an alarming paramilitary force. However, this phase of reputable fascism 
was soon to change. The perception of the BUF shifted from a benign curiosity to 
                                                            
205 Daily Worker, January 24, 1933 
206 The Guardian, March 15, 1933 
207 The Observer, October 16, 1932, p. 21. 
208 Michael A. Spurr, “Playing for Fascism: Sportmanship, Antisemitism and the British Union of Fascists,” Patterns of 
Prejudice, 37, no. 4 (2003):368. 
209 Ibid., 370. 
210 Skidelsky, 386. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
359 
a military menace by 1937. During this period, Mosley began to embrace 
increasingly radical concepts of violent resistance and anti-Semitism. The new 
manifestation of the BUF engendered a serious change in the image of the 
movement as well as that of Mosley himself. No longer considered a harmless 
radical, Mosley completed his transformation into a hated and feared militant.   
 
The Blackshirts  
uring much of the 1930s Mosley was extremely prolific in his advocacy for 
the British Union of Fascists. He traveled the country extensively, 
promoting fascism through his speeches. From 1933 to 1937 he averaged about 
200 speeches a year.
211 This was largely due to necessity; the press mostly 
boycotted BUF material, except for the occasional speech excerpt. Public 
speaking provided the only opportunity for Mosley to get his message across. 
Due to this high volume, his speeches were the most visible aspect of the 
movement’s agenda.  These events, more than actual BUF ideology or policy, 
defined the movement for most Britons. As a result, when outbreaks of violence 
at these rallies became frequent towards the end of 1933, it earned the BUF 
significant negative publicity. Still, Mosley was determined to exercise his right 
to speak freely. As such, aggressive hecklers at his meetings were often violently 
met with his own personal security detail. Known as the “Blackshirts,” this force 
became a very visible aspect of the BUF  
 
Mosley‟s stated that the Blackshirt stewards originated with his resolve to not 
succumb to disruptors.212 Mosley claimed that as the movement gained 
momentum, so did its resistors.213 Rather than allow his meetings to be shut 
down by a disruptive “organized minority,” Mosley created the London Defence 
Force to train and recruit more Blackshirt stewards.
214 He claimed that the 
creation of the Blackshirts was entirely out of defensive necessity, a result of 
increasing hostility to his movement. However, there is evidence that this force 
had an offensive capability as well. The press accused Blackshirts of unprovoked 
attacks on Communists, and later, Jews. The Times testified to Blackshirts 
verbally provoking a group of young Jewish men in London in the summer of 
1933.
215 The Daily Worker of January 23, 1936 charged Mosley‟s Blackshirts with 
raiding its offices, turning over cars and causing extensive damage.216  
                                                            
211 Skidelsky, 335. 
212 Mosley, My Life, 294. 
213 Ibid. 
214 Ibid., 296. 
215 The Times, August 15, 1933, p. 7. 
216 The Daily Worker, January 23, 1936 
D 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
360 
This paramilitary wing of the BUF., founded in 1933, lived in Chelsea, London 
at a facility known as the Black House.217 Eventually, over a thousand young men 
lived there full-time, training in various martial arts and living under military 
discipline.218 Primarily, these men served as stewards at BUF functions. As the 
movement expanded, these stewards became the trademark of the BUF  
 
From 1932-1934, Mosley‟s movement grew steadily. However, in the early 
months of 1934 the BUF enjoyed a significant leap in membership. This increase 
was largely due to the public endorsement of the BUF by Lord Rothermere. A 
well-known conservative newspaper baron with fascist leanings, Rothermere 
threw the full support of his newspaper the Daily Mail behind the BUF On 
January 8, 1934 Rothermere published an article in the Daily Mail entitled 
“Hurrah for the Blackshirts!” praising Mosley‟s movement.219 A few weeks later, 
he wrote another article defending the BUF from accusations that Mosley aimed 
for a “system of rulership by means of steel whips and concentration camps.”220 
In the same article, he also attacked critics of the BUF as “tired alarmists” and 
“panic mongers.”221 Rothermere’s continued support did much to legitimize the 
movement, and membership skyrocketed.  
 
As thousands of Rothermere’s supporters joined the BUF, Mosley was able to 
speak to larger audiences at larger venues. However, the growing success of the 
movement also fueled its opponents. After 1934, BUF rallies suffered increasing 
disturbances. As the growing presence of the movement further inflamed its 
opposition, protesters increasingly interrupted Mosley‟s speeches. The 
Blackshirts often responded brutally. Previously, Mosley was usually able to 
disarm such hecklers through a talent for ridicule acquired over a lifetime of 
public speech. As the hecklers became more determined, the Blackshirts forcibly 
removed them with a questionable degree of violence. Still, Mosley was adamant 
that the violence which often erupted at his meetings was a product of organized 
resistance to his right to speak.
222 He claimed that the violence of the Blackshirts 
was provoked by increased disruption. While this may have been true, the 
increased disruption was largely symptomatic of the anger the expanding BUF 
was causing. In this way, a vicious cycle developed. The increased violence of the 
Blackshirts incited more popular discontent with the movement, which led to 
more disruption of BUF events and, in turn, more violence. While it is difficult 
                                                            
217 David Stephen Lewis, Illusions of grandeur: Mosley fascism and British society 1931-1981, (Manchester: Manchester 
University, 1987), 62. 
218 Ibid. 
219 Daily Mail, January 8, 1934. 
220 Daily Mail, January 22, 1934. 
221 Ibid. 
222 Mosley, My Life, 295. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
361 
to determine the root of this cycle, the escalation present in confrontations from 
1932 to 1934 was evident.  
 
Brutality on both sides of podium abounded in this period, although Mosley 
claimed he forbade his Blackshirts to use weapons of any kind.
223 The 
Constitution of the Blackshirts outlined careful rules for the keeping of order at 
BUF meetings. It stated, “Interrupters will be ejected only on the instructions of 
the speaker when the persistence of an interrupter prevents those in his vicinity 
from hearing the speech. Ejection will be carried out with the minimum of force 
necessary.”
224 In My Life, Mosley recalls the slogan he used to inspire his 
protectors: “We never start fights, we only finish them.”225 At many meetings, 
hecklers showed up with nasty instruments such as razors, brass knuckles and 
other melee weapons. While Mosley‟s men were not supposed to have weapons, 
some independent accounts state that the Blackshirts used street-fighting 
weapons such as “knuckle-dusters,” or metal knuckle coverings.
226 The fights 
often resulted in serious injuries on both sides. Notwithstanding the frequent 
violence, Mosley later proudly declared that “never once” was one of his 
meetings successfully broken up.
227 Accomplished at the price of extensive 
violence, this dubious achievement was unquestionably a result of the Blackshirt 
stewards. In his autobiography, Mosley alleged that these “devoted young men” 
of the Blackshirt movement “saved free speech in Britain.”
228 The savagery of 
Mosley‟s stewards did ensure his right to free expression, but at a high price. 
Notorious Blackshirt brutality contributed greatly to its marginalization and later 
condemnation by the British public.  
 
From 1932 to 1934, tension between anti-fascists and the growing BUF led to 
increased confrontation. While the BUF was certainly not blameless in this 
escalation, there is evidence that other organizations sought conflict with Mosley 
and his movement. Initially, the Communist Party was especially determined to 
oppose fascism. Some Communist Party members actively sought the disruption 
of BUF meetings. The Communist press even seemed to encourage violence 
against the Blackshirts. The June 4 edition of the Daily Worker celebrated an 
unprovoked attack in Edinburgh that placed four Blackshirts in the hospital as a 
“good hiding.”
229 Although the Communist Party was not representative of the 
                                                            
223 Mosley, My Life, 297. 
224 Ibid. 
225 Ibid., 304. 
226 Joe Jacobs, Out of the ghetto (London: Phoenix 1978), 198. 
227 Ibid., 295. 
228 Ibid.  
229 Daily Worker, June 4, 1934. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
362 
nation as a whole, its determination to stop Mosley and the BUF was indicative 
of mounting public disgust with fascism. The best example of the Communist 
Party’s initiative to combat fascism, and the severe violence employed by the 
Blackshirts to stop them, came at the Olympia rally of June 1934.   
 
Olympia: June 7, 1934  
osley called the rally at Olympia on June 7, 1934 “the most massive and 
seriously organized attempt ever made in Britain to smash a meeting by 
violence.”230 While this may have been an exaggeration, it is certain that there 
was a definitive plan orchestrated by the Communist Party to disrupt the 
meeting. To demonstrate the strength of the movement, Mosley had planned a 
rally at the enormous Olympia meeting hall in London. On the day of the rally, 
fifteen thousand people filled the Olympia Hall to capacity.
231 Of those, about 
twelve thousand were legitimate audience members. Mosley‟s Blackshirts 
numbered about 2,000  1,000 of which were stewards spread throughout the 
crowd to deal with disruption.232 The remainder was compromised of 
Communists, Communist sympathizers, and other unaffiliated anti-fascists. 
However, it was the Communists who came with a distinct plan to prevent 
Mosley from speaking.  
 
Mosley scheduled the rally far in advance, giving his opposition ample time to 
arrange their disruption. To this end, the Communist Party authorities 
distributed a general plan, which was later published in the Daily Worker.
233 
Communist local leaders were to obtain as many tickets to the event as possible. 
They were told to encourage all cell members to apply for tickets by sending in 
fake letters of support for fascism. Some attempted to secure tickets through an 
essay contest run by Lord Rothermere and the Daily Mail, which asked 
respondents to explain “Why I Like the Blackshirts.”
234 Other members in trade 
unions were told to bring up the Olympia rally at meetings, and attempt to apply 
for tickets through their union. The Communist Party hoped to infiltrate an 
“organised opposition” within the Olympia in addition to staging a “monster mass 
demonstration” outside.
235  
 
                                                            
230 Mosley, My Life, 300. 
231 The Times, “Fascists at Olympia,” June 8, 1934, p. 16. 
232 Mosley, My Life, 300. 
233 Daily Worker, June 9, 1934. 
234 Skidelsky, 367. 
235 Daily Worker, June 9, 1934. 
M 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
363 
All of these preparations did not go unnoticed. The London Police “Special 
Branch,” responsible for monitoring underground political activities, reported on 
May 25 that “the leaders of the Communist Party have definitely decided that 
something spectacular must be carried out by members of the organization 
against the fascists at Olympia.”
236 The plan was for the anti-fascists to locate 
themselves in pockets throughout the crowd. Following Mosley‟s introduction, 
they would trade off chanting slogans in a pre-determined order. Other 
disruptors were to attempt to cut the lighting cables at a particular moment.
237 
To disguise themselves and spread confusion, Communist Party members 
planned to wear black shirts.
238  
 
During Mosley‟s speech, groups of interrupters continually shouted such slogans 
as “Fascism Means Murder: Down with Mosley” until they were removed.239 As 
soon as one group was removed, another would take up the chant. This type of 
interruption continued for a whole hour, while Mosley spoke in fits and starts. 
Eventually, the stewards succeeded in removing enough objectors to allow the 
speech to continue uninterrupted. All told, the Blackshirts forcibly removed 
about thirty protesters.
240 Still, Mosley managed to complete the speech. 
Outside of the Olympia, the police arrested 21 anti-fascist protesters for various 
charges of obstruction, public disturbance and refusing to cooperate.
241  
 
That night, Mosley appeared on the BBC to discuss the events at Olympia. 
Joining him was Gerald Barry, the editor of the News Chronicle, who had been 
present at the speech. On the broadcast, Mosley claimed that the Communists 
had come with the intent to “shout down free speech.” Armed with weapons, 
these disruptors resisted ejection violently. Mosley asked the audience “Now I 
put it to you, to your sense of fair play: would you have handled these Reds very 
gently?- when you had seen your men kicked in the stomach and slashed with 
razors, and your women with their faces streaming in blood?”
242 Gerald Barry, in 
contrast, denied seeing any weapons, but testified to seeing interrupters “being 
struck on the head, in the stomach, and all over the body with complete absence 
of restraint.”
243 Barry declared the violence at Olympia to be worse than anything 
                                                            
236 Skidelsky, 366. 
237 Ibid. 
238 Ibid., 368. 
239 The Times, “Fascists at Olympia,” p. 16. 
240 Martin Pugh, “The National Government, the British Union of Fascists and the Olympia Debate,” Historical 
Research 78, no. 200 (2005): 258. 
241 The Times, “Outside Olympia,” June 9, 1934, p. 11. 
242 Ibid., p. 12. 
243 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
364 
he had witnessed “short of the war.”244 This was the last time the B.B.C. allowed 
Mosley on for over two decades.245  
 
Following the chaotic and violent event, much of the British press lambasted 
Mosley‟s Blackshirts for their brutality at Olympia. The Times the next day 
included testimony from Geoffrey Lloyd, a Conservative MP who had attended 
the rally. Lloyd told The Times that he was “appalled by the brutal conduct of the 
fascists last night.”
246 He reported that groups of as many as twenty fascists 
ganged up on single interrupters.247  
 
As “five or six Fascists carried out an interrupter by arms and legs, several other 
Blackshirts were engaged in hitting and kicking his lifeless body.” Gerald Barry, 
the same man who had criticized Mosley on the B.B.C. the night of the Olympia 
rally, agreed that “the force used in ejecting people was much more than was 
required to get them out.”
248 Barry claimed that he saw a group of Blackshirts 
violently beating a single objector after dragging him out of view of the 
audience.
249  
 
Mosley‟s response to these accusations was also published in The Times. To those 
who reported massive beatings inflicted on protestors, Mosley simply asked 
“Where are the bodies?”
250 He claimed that “our assailants have produced only 
one man in hospital, suffering from facial and head injuries such as would be 
incurred in any serious fight. Eleven Blackshirts are hospital cases, suffering from 
stomach injuries and razor slashes.”
251 Mosley asserted that “Until the men 
injured in this way can be produced, the case against the Blackshirt goes by 
default.”
252   
 
The hospital statistics Mosley gave in defense of his Blackshirts were largely 
unverified. While the Communist Party was guilty of hatching a plan to disrupt 
the meeting, the Blackshirts were also undeniably guilty of responding with 
excessive violence. The consequence to the movement was an inevitable public 
association of the BUF with violence. This association cost Mosley potential 
supporters who might have looked favorably upon his economic policies, such as 
                                                            
244 The Times, “Outside Olympia,” p. 12. 
245 Skidelksy, 371. 
246 The Times, “Outside Olympia,” p. 11. 
247 Ibid. 
248 Ibid. 
249 Ibid. 
250 Daily Telegraph, June 15, 1934. p. 12. 
251 Ibid. 
252 Ibid. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
365 
increased deficit spending and public works initiatives. Instead, the brutality 
associated with the BUF overshadowed its actual political ideology.  
 
Mosley denied this violent characterization of his movement. Most offensive to 
Mosley was the implication that he reveled in such brutality at his meetings. He 
believed that the BUF had a “legal and moral right” to resist the attempt to 
destroy his speeches.
253 Violence was a regrettable byproduct of asserting this 
right.254 If he had been able to speak without interruption, there would have 
been no need for violence.255 Mosley refused to let a disruptive minority prevent 
him from speaking, and he believed that severe violence was justified in such 
situations.   
 
To critics of the Blackshirt stewards, Mosley cited what he saw as a longstanding 
precedent in English politics. Rowdiness at political speeches was certainly not a 
phenomenon unique to fringe politics. The practice of ejecting disruptors was as 
old as Parliament itself. Mosley himself recalled in his autobiography a near riot 
in Birmingham during his time with the Labour Party.
256 Mosley claimed he 
created the Blackshirts to complete this task “in the traditional English fashion, as 
I had seen Tories thrown out of Liberal meetings when I was nine years old.”
257 
However, the severity of his stewards’ tactics had less of a precedent. While 
scuffles at political meetings were not new, Mosley and his security detail 
brought them to a new level of brutality.  
 
In any case, much of the press condemned the BUF for the violence at Olympia. 
Only a few questioned this position. David Lloyd George of the Liberal Party 
wrote in the Sunday Pictorial on June 24, “It is difficult to explain why the fury of 
the champions of free speech should be concentrated so exclusively, not on those 
who deliberately and resolutely attempted to prevent the public expression of 
opinions, of which they disapproved, but against those who fought, however 
roughly, for freedom of speech.”
258 He agreed with Mosley that “men who enter 
meetings with the deliberate intention of suppressing free speech have no right to 
complain if an exasperated audience handles them rudely.”
259  
 
                                                            
253 Mosley, My life, 300. 
254 Ibid. 
255 Ibid. 
256 Ibid., 301. 
257 Ibid. 
258 Sunday Pictorial, June 24, 1934. 
259 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
366 
Still, most accused Mosley‟s Blackshirts of reckless violence. The Guardian 
referred to the event as “Oswald Mosley‟s Circus,” and accused Mosley of 
provoking violence to create excitement.260 The Times published an letter 
condemning the ejection of interrupters, claiming “interruptions are the real test 
of the speaker.”261 In Parliament, the consensus was also clear. Clement Atlee 
MP declared that “There is abundant evidence of deliberate incitement [by the 
Blackshirts] in order to give excuse for the exercise of force.”262 Isaac Foot MP 
asked the House of Commons if the Illegal Training and Drilling Act of 1819 
could be applied to the BUF.
263 After some debate, the House decided it did not 
apply.264 Still, this discussion illustrated the level of opposition to Mosley 
following Olympia. As both the Press and Parliament condemned his movement, 
Mosley found himself further marginalized by the violence of his Blackshirts.  
 
Regardless of whether Mosley‟s Blackshirts were at all justified in their actions at 
Olympia, they acquired a violent and ruthless reputation. Although organized 
disruption and violent expulsion in the style of Olympia was not seen again, the 
damage to the movement was done. The explosion of media coverage in such 
mainstream newspapers as The Times and the Guardian on the Olympia incident 
permanently associated violence with the BUF Olympia was the first decisive 
step in the final marginalization of Mosley and the BUF. 
 
The Final Radicalization of the BUF
  
n the next few years following Olympia, the character of the BUF as well as 
Mosley changed significantly. The people associated with the movement, as 
well its policies, ideas and actions, completed Mosley‟s transformation into a 
national pariah. By the end of 1936, Mosley had become the hated leader of a 
radical oppositional movement.  
 
One particular cause of this change in perception was Mosley‟s political 
sympathy to German National Socialism and Adolf Hitler. The British public was 
initially conflicted on how to interpret the new German leader. Many 
conservatives, such as Lord Rothermere, praised Hitler’s initiative and 
leadership.
265 Others were less enthusiastic about the new Germany. However, 
                                                            
260 Guardian, June 8, 1934. 
261 Arthur Madsen et al, “Blackshirts and Interrupters,” The Times, June 12, 1934, p. 15. 
262 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, June 14, 1934 (London: Hansard), column 1930. 
263 Ibid., column 1924. 
264 Ibid., column 1925. 
265 Daily Mail, October 24, 1933. 
I 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
367 
the events of the summer of 1934 caused a large swing in British public opinion 
against Hitler.  
 
Just three weeks after Olympia came Hitler’s infamous Night of the Long 
Knives.  Between June 30 and July 2, 1934, Hitler ordered the systematic killing 
of an estimated 85 political rivals.
266 Hitler claimed that this was a reaction to a 
treasonous conspiracy, but even contemporaries were doubtful. In Britain, this 
event had serious consequences for popular perception of the Nazi regime. A 
letter to the editor in the July 16 edition of The Times asserted that Hitler’s 
“account of the conspiracy…
 carries no conviction at all.”267 Another letter 
condemned the “sensational developments in the political situation,” referring to 
the abundance of “Fear” and “Mass Hysteria.”268 
 
Mosley and the BUF openly supported Hitler’s actions. The movement’s 
newspaper Blackshirt ran an article accusing the men murdered by Hitler of “the 
greatest Fascist crime of disloyalty to their leader.”269 Mosley‟s decision to 
publicly support Hitler’s purge had serious consequences for the image of the 
BUF Already seen as a willfully violent entity following Olympia, the support of 
the purge further pigeonholed the BUF as a would-be tyrannical regime. As the 
tide of British opinion turned against Germany, Mosley‟s continuing support of 
German National Socialism proved devastating to the image of the BUF  
 
As a consequence of Olympia and the BUF‟s endorsement of Hitler’s political 
purge, Rothermere withdrew the support of the Daily Mail in late July. 
Rothermere had been urging Mosley to moderate the movement for some time. 
He wanted Mosley to discontinue the use of the term “Fascist” as well as severely 
modify his plans for fascist government. Rothermere hoped to bring Mosley‟s 
movement within the fold of orthodox Conservatism. After Mosley refused, 
Rothermere withdrew his support for the movement. Mosley later claimed that 
Rothermere’s rejection of the BUF was due to pressure from Jewish 
advertisers.
270 His accusation, while unverified, served his later anti-Semitic 
agenda.  
 
                                                            
266 Klaus Epstein, “The Nazi consolidation of Power,” Journal of Contemporary History 34 no. 1 (March 1962): 74. 
267 The Times, “Herr Hitler‟s Apologia,” July 16, 1934, p. 13. 
268 Arthur Compton-Rickett, “The Gospel of Hitler,” The Times, July 11, 1934, p. 15. 
269 Blackshirt, July 1934. 
270 Mosley, My life, 346. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
368 
Anti-Semitism in the BUF  
hrough the early stages of the BUF, Mosley considered anti-Semitism to be 
largely unrelated to fascism. In fact, Mosley‟s initial refusal to incorporate 
anti-Jewish propaganda into the movement led to criticism from hard-line anti-
Semitic groups. Most notably, Arnold Leese of the Imperial Fascist League 
caustically referred to the BUF as the “British Jewnion of Fascists,” and publicly 
attacked its form of “kosher fascism.”
271 Leese’s group was truly on the political 
fringe, never amounting to more than a few hundred members. However, Leese 
saw his group as being in competition with the BUF In his publication The Fascist: 
The Organ of Racial Fascism Leese focused intently on the supposed Jewish 
financial conspiracy, in stark contrast to the BUF‟s less racially oriented 
policies.
272  
 
Despite pressure from other fascist groups, Mosley initially remained steadfast in 
his refusal to commit to an anti-Semitic agenda. In a statement to the Jewish 
Chronicle in January 1933, Mosley promised that “anti-semitism forms no part of 
the policy of this Organisation, and anti-semitic propaganda is forbidden.”
273 
Despite this declaration, the BUF was often associated with anti-Semitism. This 
association was mainly due to the views held by other prominent BUF members. 
Although the BUF officially barred anti-Semitism from the movement, a number 
of potent anti-Semites held positions in the BUF   
 
The most influential of these early promoters of anti-Semitism was William 
Joyce. Joyce was an American-born Irish national with a deep-seated hatred for 
Jews. A powerful orator, Cecil Roberts described Joyce’s unique impact after 
hearing him speak in 1933:  
 
Thin, pale, intense, he had not been speaking many minutes 
before we were electrified by this man. I have been a connoisseur 
of speech-making for a quarter of a century, but never before, in 
any country, had I met a personality so terrifying its dynamic 
force, so vituperative, so vitriolic… He ridiculed our political 
system, he scarified our leading politicians, seizing upon their 
vulnerable 
points with a destructive analysis that left them bereft 
of merit or morality.274   
 
                                                            
271 The Fascist: The Organ of Racial Fascism 65, October 1934. 
272 Ibid. 
273 Jewish Chronicle, January 6, 1933. 
274 J.A. Cole, Lord Haw-Haw  and William Joyce: the full story (London: Faber and Faber, 1964), 45. 
T 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
369 
Joyce went on to broadcast English-language Nazi propaganda during the Second 
World War after fleeing to Germany in 1939. Known as “Lord Haw-Haw,” his 
radio show “Germany Calling” attempted to demoralize British listeners through 
spreading of Nazi and anti-Semitic propaganda. Many Britons initially listened to 
his radio show out of curiosity and hopes of more accurate war news. Later, 
“Lord Haw-Haw” was to become a household name in Britain synonymous with 
Nazi evil. He earned the hatred of his country, and was executed for treason in 
1946.
275 During his time with the BUF from 1932-1937, Joyce represented the 
loudest voice for an anti-Semitic policy.  
 
Having joined the BUF shortly after its founding in 1932, BUF policy initially 
forced Joyce to temper his violently anti-Semitic views. Mosley‟s position on 
anti-Semitism was clear: it was irrelevant to fascism. Despite this handicap to 
Joyce’s ideology, his talent for incisive rhetoric soon made him the most 
renowned speaker in the BUF after Mosley himself. Following the incident at 
Olympia in June 1934, Mosley promoted Joyce to the position of Propaganda 
Director.
276 In this capacity, Joyce greatly expanded his influence. As Mosley 
began to adopt some anti-Semitic tendencies late in 1934, Joyce was 
instrumental in bringing this attitude to the forefront of fascist politics.  
 
While Mosley was ill for a few months following Olympia in late 1934, Joyce 
became the primary speaker at BUF events.277 Although he downplayed his 
rhetoric, Joyce’s hysterical anti-Semitism was apparent. He claimed that the 
common root of every national problem was always Jewish treachery. His 
speeches warned of a “two-pronged Jewish advance, by means of capitalism and 
Communism, towards world domination.”278 Partially as a result of Joyce’s 
rhetoric, by the time Mosley returned to full involvement in the fall of 1934, the 
movement was progressing towards full-blown anti-Semitism.  
 
Although Mosley was not entirely responsible for this transformation of the BUF 
position on “The Jewish question,” he was not without blame. Even in 1932-33, 
Mosley did little to rid the movement of anti-Semitic individuals. After the 
founding of the BUF in October 1932, the small fringe of existing British fascist 
groups flocked to Mosley banner. Many of these groups were based on anti-
Semitic principles. Rotha Linton-Orman’s British Fascisti, for example, had been 
founded primarily as an anti-Semitic organization.
279 In addition, despite Arnold 
                                                            
275 Cole, 17. 
276 Ibid., 46. 
277 Ibid., 60. 
278 Ibid. 
279 Cross, 57. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
370 
Leese’s distaste for the BUF, many members of his Imperial Fascist League 
defected to Mosley. As a result, the BUF began with a core following heavily 
committed to anti-Semitism. Mosley claimed he allowed men with such views to 
join his movement in the belief that they wanted to move beyond simple anti-
Semitism to “a bigger and better fight.”280   
 
As a result, even in the early BUF there was a significant dichotomy between 
official policy on anti-Semitism and the actual beliefs and actions of BUF 
members. The irony of Mosley‟s fascist movement is that many of his followers 
disobeyed his supposed absolute command in asserting small-scale anti-Semitism. 
As a result, while Mosley continued to publicly declare that “anti-semitism forms 
no part of the policy of this Organisation,” what happened on the ground was 
entirely different.
281  
 
As skirmishes between fascists and British Jews increased, the intrinsic anti-
Semitism within the BUF boiled over into outright persecution. One incident in 
the East End of London in April 1933 exemplified mounting Jewish-fascist 
tensions. London police arrested seven BUF members and six Jewish citizens for 
creating a public disturbance.
282 The fascists had been selling the BUF publication 
Blackshirt on a street corner in a Jewish neighborhood. A scuffle erupted, and the 
police arrived and arrested all parties involved, although none were officially 
charged.283 A week later, the fascists returned to the same street corner, this 
time with twelve members. Again a fight broke out, and three of the fascists 
were injured, with one hospitalized with a concussion.284 The police arrested 
eight of their assaulters for assault and disorderly conduct. The officer noted that 
all eight men “appeared to be of the Jewish faith.”
285 Two were sentenced to five 
weeks in jail.286 However, the officer also noted the “extremely provocative” 
attitude of the fascists.287   
 
Mosley subsequently wrote to the police department, proposing “personally to 
take charge of the Party selling newspapers in this area.”288 He stated his desire to 
“conform in every way with Police regulation,” but also wanted to “affirm the 
right of Englishmen to pursue any legal and peaceful activity in this country 
                                                            
280 Mosley, My life, 341. 
281 Jewish Chronicle, January 6, 1933. 
282 Skidelsky, 382. 
283 The Times, August 15, 1933. 
284 Skidelsky, 382. 
285 Ibid. 
286 Ibid. 
287 Ibid. 
288 Ibid. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
371 
without molestation and assault.”289 The conflict eventually ended with Mosley 
withdrawing his newspaper from that particular street corner. However, the 
Coventry Street brawls and similar incidents indicated the degree of fascist 
provocation of Jews and subsequent Jewish-fascist conflict, even before the BUF 
adopted an official anti-Semitic agenda.  
 
Much of the mounting conflict between British fascism and British Jews was out 
of Mosley‟s control. Although he repeatedly denied the BUF‟s involvement with 
anti-Semitism, much of his message failed to convince. In the Jewish Economic 
Forum on July 28, 1933, Mosley reaffirmed his message to British Jews. He 
insisted that “Bias for or against the Jew is completely irrelevant to the issues 
involved in our political creed,” and that “religious and racial tolerance” was a 
part of the BUF‟s agenda.
290 He claimed that attacks on the Jews in Germany 
were not due to “any Fascist principle but are the manifestation of an inherent 
quality in the German character.”
291 Mosley hoped to assert that fascism was not 
inextricably linked to anti-Semitism. Still, Mosley‟s declarations in upper-class 
Jewish publications did little to change the anti-Semitic actions of his own 
followers. Incidents like the one at Coventry Street illustrated that Mosley‟s 
followers did not share his aversion to “Jew-baiting.”  
 
By 1933, there were about 350,000 Jews living in Britain.292 Of these, about 
200,000 lived in London, and 150,000 in the London East End.293 Many of these 
individuals were impoverished recent immigrants from Eastern Europe, some 
without knowledge of English. Understandably, many British Jews strongly 
opposed Mosley‟s movement, identifying it with German National Socialism and 
its more express anti-Semitic policies. This assumption was entirely valid. 
Mosley‟s public support of Hitler even after the Rohm purge of July 1934 
indicated his relationship with German National Socialism. Mosley and the BUF 
maintained a friendly relationship with many prominent Nazis.
294 In 1937, the 
Nazi government invited 20 members of the BUF to tour Germany.295 While 
there, the anti-Semitic Nazi propagandist Julius Streicher gave a speech praising 
the unity of international fascism.
296 Streicher referred to his BUF guests as 
“brothers and comrades” against a “common enemy…the Jew.”297 Besides such 
                                                            
289 Skidelsky, 382. 
290 Jewish Economic Forum, July 28, 1933. 
291 Ibid. 
292 Miron Kantorowitsch, “Estimate of the Jewish Population of London 1929-1933,” Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society 99, no. 2 (1936): 374. 
293 Ibid. 
294 The Times, “Herr Streicher Greets British Fascists,” July 29, 1937, p. 13. 
295 Ibid. 
296 Ibid. 
297 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
372 
alarming anti-Semitic propaganda, reports of fascist violence such as at Coventry 
Street also verified Jewish assumptions.   
 
As such, attempted truces between fascists and Jews had little impact. When the 
August 4, 1933 Jewish Chronicle condemned Jewish attacks on fascists as “wicked 
and stupid,” most ignored its declaration.
298 The vast majority of Jews felt 
actively persecuted by the BUF, and Mosley‟s lip-service to abolishing anti-
Semitism within his movement failed to convince. Even in the early days of the 
BUF, the latent anti-Semitism present within the BUF proved highly 
inflammatory.  Olympia proved to be the turning point for Mosley‟s official 
position on the “Jewish question.” Mosley became embittered over what he saw 
as institutionalized Jewish opposition to fascism. As a result, for the first time in 
his career he began to publicly attack Jews. He claimed that his verbal attacks 
were really in defense of Jews determined to destroy his movement. However, 
much of this shift in ideology can be attributed to an effort to win over the urban 
working class.  
 
Mosley hoped to fill a niche in anti-immigrant propaganda present in Britain for 
decades. Organizations such as the British Brothers League had gained significant 
following in urban areas in previous years.
299 Formed in 1902, the League 
espoused an anti-Semitic platform seeking to limit Jewish immigration from 
Eastern Europe.300 Its limited success can be attributed to traditional friction of 
the working class with large immigrant populations during times of scarcity. 
Perceived competition over jobs, customers, and culture led to reactions from 
native Britons. Conditions in 1934 were ripe for this type of clash, and Mosley 
hoped to capitalize with a new “Britain for the British” policy, thereby further 
marginalizing British Jewish immigrants.
301 Still, Mosley‟s decision to campaign 
against Jewish interests in Britain proved to be the death knell for his 
movement’s short-lived public appeal.  
 
In a speech on October 28, 1934, Mosley publicly mentioned Jews for the first 
time. To preface his position, he claimed that “the Jews more than any other 
single force in this country are carrying on a violent propaganda against us.”
302 He 
declared that thirty-two of the sixty-four people convicted for attacks on fascists 
in the past year were Jewish
3031 He read out the surnames of the convicted men 
                                                            
298 Jewish Chronicle, August 4, 1933. 
299 Robert Benewick, Political violence and public order: a study of British Fascism (London: Allen Lane, 1969), 27. 
300 Ibid. 
301 Ibid. 
302 Skidelsky, 386. 
303 Ibid. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
373 
amidst howls from the audience.304 In Britain Jews represented six percent of the 
population, yet Mosley alleged that Jews were responsible for fifty percent of 
attacks on the BUF.305 While some Jews certainly opposed the BUF, Mosley‟s 
statistics were questionable. In addition, many of these “attacks” on fascists had 
been provoked by Mosley‟s own men. Still, Mosley insisted that he did not attack 
“the Jews on racial or religious grounds,” but “because they fight against Fascism 
and against Britain.”
306 “Organized Jewry” thus replaced Communism as the 
primary enemy of British fascism.   
 
Mosley introduced this new commitment against the Jews on two levels. In the 
same speech, Mosley asserted that “big Jews” in the Press were conspiring to 
discredit the BUF.
307 Mosley cited Rothermere’s withdrawal of support for the 
BUF as proof of this conscious attack. The other level of assault came from “little 
Jews.”308 This consisted of the physical attacks on his meetings by working class 
anti-fascist Jews.309 Together, he claimed, British Jews aimed to prevent the BUF 
from accomplishing its goal of saving Britain from inevitable downfall.310 As 
such, Mosley committed himself to battling the collective Jewish consciousness 
that he now presented as his primary antagonist.  
 
This new policy changed the nature of the BUF drastically. For one, Joyce was 
now free to spout his venomous propaganda, which he did with abandon. In a 
pamphlet entitled “Fascism and Jewry,” Joyce claimed “these little sub-men are a 
nuisance to be eliminated.”311 This new message of hate proved costly to 
Mosley‟s movement. In November 1934, Mosley lost yet another close friend 
and supporter as a result of the radicalization of his politics. Robert Forgan, the 
last of the original four Labour MPs who resigned with Mosley to form the New 
Party, quietly retired as a result of the BUF‟s new policy of anti-Semitism.
312 
Mosley was now without a single tie to the political establishment he came from. 
Following Forgan’s departure, Mosley and the BUF‟s popularity with the average 
Briton plummeted further. No longer seen as a “colorful eccentric,” Mosley was 
a name that was spat and not spoken. The culmination of this trend was the so-
called Battle of Cable Street in October 1936.   
 
                                                            
304 Skidelsky, 386. 
305 Ibid. 
306 Ibid. 
307 Ibid. 
308 Ibid. 
309 Ibid. 
310 Ibid. 
311 William Joyce and Sons of Liberty, Fascism and Jewry (Metairie, LA: Sons of Liberty, 1976), 8. 
312 Cross, The Fascists in Britain, 124. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
374 
The Battle of Cable Street and the Public Order Act of 1936  
ollowing Mosley‟s declaration of war against “Organized Jewry” in late 1934, 
the BUF began a decisive campaign in the London East End. Hoping to pick 
up where the British Brothers League had left off, Mosley concentrated much of 
his efforts in this area. Although he managed to win some converts, the constant 
BUF presence led to significant tension with Jews living in the area. Similar to 
the Coventry Street conflicts of 1933, numerous incidents took place between 
Blackshirts and anti-fascist Jews.
313 Incendiary speeches by Mosley, Joyce and 
other BUF speakers frequently provoked squads of Jewish disruptors. Both sides 
claimed persecution at the hands of the other. It was in this climate of street 
skirmishes that the Battle of Cable Street occurred.  
 
In order to commemorate the fourth anniversary of the BUF‟s founding, Mosley 
proposed an organized march through London on October 4, 1936. However, 
the increasing anti-Semitic platform of the BUF earned it the hostility of the 
Jewish People’s Council, which represented Jewish friendly societies and trade 
unions.
314 The Council gathered signatures for a petition to prevent the fascist 
demonstration.315 However, officials refused to ban the event. Instead, they 
mustered six thousand police officers to prevent violence as a result of the 
march.
316 Mosley and three thousand of his supporters intended to march from 
the Royal Mint to the districts of Shoreditch, Limehouse, Bow and Bethnal 
Green.
317 The intent was to stop at each location to allow Mosley to deliver a 
speech.   
 
However, when Mosley and his entourage arrived at the Royal Mint, they found 
an enormous crowd blocking Cable Street. As the police attempted to clear a 
path for the procession, they faced stiff opposition from the protesters. 
Meanwhile, the Blackshirts and the crowd shared angry exchanges. The fascists 
chanted “M-O-S-L-E-Y, we want Mosley”, while the crowd responded “So do 
we, dead or alive.”
318 After a struggle, the Commissioner of Police Sir Philip 
Game gave up and contacted the Home Secretary for permission to cancel the 
march.
319 For the sake of avoiding more violence, the Home Secretary agreed. 
                                                            
313 “Coventry Street conflicts” refers to the incidents of April 1933 over fascists selling newspapers in the East End of 
London. 
314 Joe Jacobs, Out of the ghetto: my youth in the East End: communism and fascism, 1913-1939 (London: Janet Simon, 
1978), 255. 
315 Ibid. 
316 Ibid. 
317 Ibid. 
318 Daily Herald, October 5, 1936. 
319 Jacobs, 255. 
F 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
375 
Game ordered the fascists to disperse, and Mosley complied. By the time the 
incident was over, 83 protesters were arrested and nearly 100 injured.320  
 
The BUF responded in the press by claiming “Socialists, Communists and Jews 
openly organised not only to attack the meetings but to close the streets of 
London by violence.”
321 A protester named Reg Weston confirmed that many of 
the protesters prepared ahead for the disruption. He testified that “The Daily 
Worker acted as the main organiser for the protests centrally. By midweek we 
were getting plenty of information and so were its thousands of readers, 
especially in the factories and workplaces such as the bus garages and the rail 
depots.”
322 Still, many accused Mosley of marching with the intent to incite 
violence. The prevention of the march was popularly seen as a victory against 
racism and violence. Max Levitas, a protester interviewed years later, fondly 
recalled the Battle of Cable Street as “a victory for ordinary people against racism 
and anti-Semitism.”
323  
 
The incident at Cable Street was the final straw for the British government. 
Previously, the government never directly interfered with the BUF‟s activities. 
However, Cable Street illustrated the level of popular opposition to Mosley and 
his movement. The government was convinced that the potential for violence 
and unrest was too great. As a result, Parliament voted for the Public Order Bill, 
which was enacted as the Public Order Act on January 1, 1937.
324  
 
The Public Order Act specifically targeted the BUF The Act stated that “any 
person who in any public place or at any public meeting wears uniform signifying 
his association with any political organisation or with the promotion of any 
political object shall be guilty of an offence.”
325 The Act explicitly outlawed 
“quasimilitary organisations,” defined as groups “organised or trained or equipped 
for the purpose of enabling them to be employed in usurping the functions of the 
police or of the armed forces of the Crown.”
326 It also prohibited creating an 
organization “for the purpose of enabling them to be employed for the use or 
                                                            
320 The Times, “Fascist and Jew; Police Action in East End,” October 30, 1936, p. 7. 
321 Daily Worker, October 5, 1936. 
322 Reg Weston, “Reg Weston Account of Battle of Cable Street,” http://libcom.org/library/fascists-and- police-
routed-battle-cable-street. 
323 The Guardian, September 30, 2006. 
324 The Times, “Public Order Act Prosecution,” January 28, 1937, p. 16. 
325 “The Public Order Act 1936 (c.6),” December 18, 1939, The UK statute law database, 
http://www.statutelaw.gov.uk/content.aspx?LegType=All+Legislation&searchEnacted=0&extentMatchOnly=
0&confersPower=0&blanketAmendment=0&sortAlpha=0&PageNumber=0&NavFrom=0&activeTextDocId=1
083745&parentActiveTextDocId=0&showAllAttributes=0&showProsp=0&suppressWarning=0&hideComment
ary=1. 
326 Ibid. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
376 
display of physical force in promoting any political object, or in such manner as 
to arouse reasonable apprehension that they are organised and either trained or 
equipped for that purpose.”
327 This second definition gave fair license to limit any 
fascist activity that was deemed to “arouse reasonable apprehension.”   
 
The strict nature of the Act revealed Parliament’s growing uneasiness with the 
BUF Many MPs considered it to be essentially a military organization. John 
Clynes MP worried that “A garb answering to a uniform and worn in what really 
is a military march and in a military manner and spirit brings into our political 
activities alien elements making for conflict and disorder.”
328 Daniel Chater MP 
went so far as to assert the need for the government to actively oppose the 
fascists. He asked the government “to take the necessary steps to organise 
ourselves efficiently and effectively as an opposition force to the Fascists.”
329 
After the onset of the Second World War, this uneasiness grew to distrust 
significant enough to order the internment of all fascist sympathizers. In 1936, 
however, the government mainly concerned itself with preserving public order.  
 
Initially, there was some doubt as to whether the government would enforce the 
Act. This doubt was quickly resolved. In early January, a BUF member selling 
newspapers on a street corner was arrested for wearing a “peaked cap with a 
leather chin-stap and… two badges commonly associated with the British Union 
of Fascists” and “a black shirt and black tie.”
330 It was evident that the police 
intended to enforce the new legislation.  
 
The Public Order Act forced Mosley and his men to abandon the Blackshirt 
uniform. However, Mosley considered this a minor blow. He believed that “the 
black shirt had fulfilled its practical purpose, and the chief loss was 
sentimental.”
331 A greater consequence was the loss of the ability to steward 
meetings. While the BUF could still lawfully steward its indoor meetings, they 
were forced to allow the police to maintain order at outdoor meetings. The 
inexperience of the police in dealing with political events made it far easier to 
disrupt BUF meetings. The police were less willing to resort to violence in order 
to save the meeting. As such, Mosley‟s speeches were increasingly broken up by 
protesters. The BUF‟s primary form of expression was now even more limited. 
Besides the Blackshirt publication, public speaking and demonstrations had been 
the only arena for the BUF to communicate its message. As more meetings were 
                                                            
327 “The Public Order Act 1936 (c.6)” 
328 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, November 16, 1936 (London: Hansard), column 1369. 
329 Ibid., column 1386. 
330 The Times, “Public Order Act Prosecution,” p. 16. 
331 Mosley, My life, 312. 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
377 
successfully disrupted by anti-fascist protesters, the BUF’s faltering politics 
collapsed.  
 
Beginning with Olympia, the theme of 1934-1936 for Mosley and the BUF was 
alienation. Not from the political establishment, as in the New Party and early 
BUF, but from the average Briton. The public violence and anti-Semitism 
ensured the transformation of the BUF from an “entertaining spectacle” to a 
dangerous “quasimilitary organization.”
332 The Public Order Act was 
instrumental in this respect. It both demonstrated and reinforced public 
opposition to the BUF A growing national perception of the BUF as violent, 
radical and anti-Semitic eradicated his support amongst average Britons.  
 
A few years earlier, Mosley regarded anti-Semitism as an irrelevant pursuit and a 
criminal waste of energy and resources. Ironically, it became the most visible 
aspect of his movement. Anti-Semitism won Mosley supporters, but not the ones 
he hoped. The BUF had become “one of those crank little societies… mad about 
the Jews,” as Mosley had contemptuously characterized the Imperial Fascist 
League four years earlier.
333 The new policy attracted psychotic “Jew-baiters” 
who had little interest in fascism itself. At the same time, it estranged more 
levelheaded Britons, who were alarmed by Mosley‟s declaration of war on 
“Organized Jewry.” William Joyce and other prominent members of the BUF 
continued to lambaste the Jews for destroying the movement’s political 
credibility. What they did not realize was that a policy of anti-Semitism did more 
damage to the legitimacy of the movement than any concerted effort by Jews, 
real or imaginary.  
 
 
IV. Conclusion  
y the onset of the Second World War on September 1, 1939, British fascism 
was a dead ideology. Popular association of the BUF with the Nazi regime 
solidified existing public revulsion towards Mosley and his movement. Vilified by 
the press and hated by his country, the British government forcibly interned 
Mosley in 1940.
334 With this result in mind, it is tempting to declare that British 
fascism was never a possibility. It would seem, as Harold Nicolson told Mosley in 
                                                            
332 Skidelsky, 386. 
333 Ibid., 291. 
334 Great Britain, Parliamentary debates, House of Commons, December 14, 1939 (London: Hansard), Col. 1238. 
B 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
378 
November of 1931, that fascism was simply “not suited to England.”335 However, 
this conclusion is not altogether true.  
 
In the world political climate of the early 1930s, a fascist government in Britain 
was possible, if unlikely. Contemporaneous sources agree with this assertion. In 
an October 1932 interview with Harold Nicolson, David Lloyd George was 
hesitant to declare fascism impossible in Britain.
336 Other opinions in the 1930s 
were also optimistic about fascism’s chances in Britain. Johannes Steel, a German 
socialist intellectual, wrote an essay entitled “Fascism in the West” in the spring 
of 1934.
337 He attacked the British Labour government as “thoroughly 
bourgeois,” characterizing its leaders as “tired old men who feel they cannot take 
any risks.”338 He blamed Mosley‟s coming rise to power on the stupidity of 
Labour politicians, who rejected his “proposals for the reduction of 
unemployment and snubbed him for his urge to “do something.””339 Steel 
believed that “England, like all other countries where society is organized in 
defense of capitalism, will soon pass through a phase of fascism.”
340 Written at 
the height of Rothermere’s support for the BUF in March 1934, Steel believed 
that Mosley would soon come to power. While Steel’s prediction proved false, it 
illustrates the fact that in the early 1930s, many did not believe British fascism to 
be a doomed prospect. It was the decisions Mosley made that ensured his 
ideology never came to fruition.  
  
Mosley‟s movement was less “not suited” to Britain than it was misapplied. The 
first mistake Mosley made was in his use of the term “fascism”. By borrowing 
from the Italian faction, he undermined the nationalistic aspect of his own 
movement. “Fascism” was so ill-defined that he had little to gain by adopting the 
word. Instead, it created a parallel to the Italian state which proved misleading. 
Mosley intended his concept of fascism as outlined in The greater Britain as a 
method to set up the corporate state. His initial vision of fascism was largely a 
means to an end. As discussed, he believed fascism was the only way to solve the 
economic crisis and insulate Britain‟s economic future. Yet, it was not the 
ultimate solution.  In the conclusion of The greater Britain, Mosley asserts that a 
fascist government would no longer be necessary after the corporate state had 
                                                            
335 Nicolson and Nicolson, 85. 
336 Ibid., 88. 
337 Johannes Steel, “Fascism in the West,” in They were there: the story of World War II and how it came about, ed. Curt 
Riess (London: Ayer, 1944), 53. 
338 Ibid. 
339 Ibid. 
340 Ibid., 52 
Bret Rubin    Sir Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists 
379 
been perfected.341 Mosley hoped to exploit fascism to create a sort of utopian 
industrial society. In the end, it seems, fascism exploited him.   
 
The BUF‟s anti-Semitic policy marked the beginning of Mosley‟s loss of 
perspective within the fascist monster he created. When Mosley adopted an anti-
Semitic platform in October 1934, he relinquished his original economic goals in 
order to pursue an imaginary war against “Organized Jewry.” His earlier goal of 
the corporate state, combined with an emphasis on the home market and 
imperial isolation, faded into the background, overshadowed by anti-Semitic 
propaganda. As it became clear that Mosley‟s concept of fascism was not taking 
hold, he faced increasing pressure to conform to existing fascist archetypes. In a 
bid for popularity, Mosley gave in to the pressure of Joyce and others within the 
movement to attack the Jewish community. While he gained some supporters 
with this tactic, they were not the ones he hoped to represent. He soon found 
himself alienated from the constituents he hoped to win.  Mosley vision of 
himself leading the “modern” generation into a new political era disintegrated as 
he lost the trust of mainstream Britain. Instead, his movement became a safe 
haven for anti-Semites, lonely military officers, and radical pseudo-intellectuals. 
His appeal to the average Briton was almost nonexistent; indeed, the average 
Briton regarded him as a dangerous and violent would-be despot. When Mosley 
was released from forced government internment due to life-threatening illness 
in 1943, a Mass Observation study found that 87 percent of the country 
disapproved of his discharge.
342 Mosley had truly become an enemy of the 
people.  
 
In the end, the BUF achieved essentially nothing. In historical terms, its most 
significant achievement was contributing to the destruction of fascism as a 
credible ideology. Modern connotations of fascism are understandably negative, 
and it is difficult to imagine a world before the West condemned fascism as 
inherently evil. In the early 1930s, there was significant admiration for the 
achievements of the fascist movements in Italy and Germany. The dynamic 
changes brought by fascist leaders like Hitler and Mussolini appealed to many 
Britons. The frustrating inaction of the Labour Party and the following National 
Government made fascism seem favorable. However, by the onset World War II 
it was clear that fascism was not a possibility for Britain. Much of this, of course, 
was due to the negative perception of the fascist governments in Europe. As 
Hitler became more aggressive, the tide of British public opinion turned against 
him. The Night of the Long Knives in June of 1934 was the first step in the 
                                                            
341 Mosley, The greater Britain, 189. 
342 Skidelsky, 462. 
intersections            Autumn 2010 
380 
popular condemnation of Hitler’s dictatorship. Still, European fascism remained 
far enough removed from Britain that it was not an immediate concern for most 
Britons in the 1930s. The evils of foreign fascism only appeared as an occasional 
story in the newspaper, or rumors from contacts abroad.  
 
If not for the BUF, many British citizens may never have found themselves so 
opposed to fascism. Sir Oswald and his movement brought the experience of 
fascism closer to home. The British public could ignore accounts of foreign 
tyranny, aggression and persecution. However, it was impossible for them to 
disregard the British Union of Fascists. The extent of Mosley‟s public 
appearances, and the inevitable conflicts they led to, made the BUF eminently 
visible. Any British citizen living in a major city from 1932 to 1939 could not 
escape Mosley and his movement. Everyone had an opinion. Initially, some 
found the flash and zeal of the movement appealing. Others were determined to 
fight it at the risk of their own lives. Regardless, the BUF was far more real to 
most Britons than any story of fascism in Europe.   
 
From the beginning, the movement aimed to attract attention. Mosley rooted his 
grand plan for a new “modern” government in a dream of mobilizing the young 
and young-minded of the nation. His political credentials and powerful charisma 
brought the discussion of British fascism to the fore of both Parliament and the 
average dinner table. The unfortunate arc of Mosley‟s political career began the 
negative popular perception of fascism, to be completed by the actions of Hitler 
and Mussolini and the Second World War. In the end, his movement’s greatest 
achievement was the destruction of the British fascist ideal it hoped to promote.  
 
 
 
 
 