



File:Mosley.jpg - Wikimedia Commons





































Jump to content

	
		
			
				

	
	

Main menu
	
	


				
		

	
	Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Navigate
	
	
		
		
			
			
Main page
Welcome
Community portal
Village pump
Help center
		
		
	


	

	
		Participate
	
	
		
		
			
			
Upload file
Recent changes
Latest files
Random file
Contact us
Special pages
		
		
	




				

	


		
			

	
	
		
	


		
		
			

	

Search
	
	
		
			
				
					
						
						
					
					
				
				Search
			
		
	


			
	
	

	
		
		
			


English



			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	
		

	
	

Appearance
	
	


			
				
			
		
	


	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
Donate


Create account


Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	

	
	

Personal tools
	
	


		

	
		
		
			


Donate




Create account




Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	




		
	


	
		
			
		
		
			
		
			
				
				
				
		
		
	
	
				
					
					
	
	
Contents
	move to sidebar
	hide



	
		

			
				Beginning
			
		
		

		
			
				1
				File
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				2
				Summary
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				3
				Licensing
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				4
				File history
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				5
				File usage on Commons
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				6
				File usage on other wikis
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				7
				Metadata
			
		
		
		
		
	



					
		
			
		
		
			
				
					
						

	
	

Toggle the table of contents
	
	


							
			
		
	


					
					File:Mosley.jpg
		
	

				
					
						
							
								

	
		
		
			
File


Discussion


			
		
		
	


								

	
	English
	
	


					

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


				
	


							
						
						
							
			    

	
		
		
			
Read


Edit


View history


			
		
		
	


			

							
								

	
	

Tools
	
	


									
						

	
	Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Actions
	
	
		
		
			


Read




Edit




View history


			
		
		
	



	
		General
	
	
		
		
			
			
What links here
Related changes
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Concept URI
		
		
	



	
		Print/export
	
	
		
		
			
			
Download as PDF
Printable version
		
		
	



	
		In other projects
	
	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	




									
				
	


							
						
					
				
				
					
						
							
				
							
		
						
							
				
	
	Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide





							
		
					
				
				
					
					
						From Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository
						
						
					
					
					
Size of this preview: 500 × 724 pixels. Other resolutions: 250 × 362 pixels | 564 × 817 pixels.
Original file (564 × 817 pixels, file size: 40 KB, MIME type: image/jpeg)
File informationStructured data
Captions
CaptionsEnglishOswald Mosley c. 1934.ItalianMosley nel c. 1934
Summary[edit]





DescriptionMosley.jpg

English:  Oswald Mosley c. 1934.




Date

Tue, 06 Nov 1934




Source


https://www.newspapers.com/article/liverpool-daily-post-sir-oswald-mosley/165051865/ (without notice)

https://www.facebook.com/kaiserreichdeathofanempire (direct source; best version found without a watermark. Higher quality does exist on Getty, but watermarked)

Own work (grayscaled it, cropped to published size)




Author

Unknown authorUnknown author. Newspaper did not credit an author and no alternate publication of the same photograph that was able to be found by a Google Images search carried the name of a photographer. Credited to Hulton-Deutsch on Getty Images, but this is most likely the name of a company.




Other versions






This image has an extracted file: Mosley (cropped).jpg.










Licensing[edit]



Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse






This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published in the United States between 1931 and 1977, inclusive, without a copyright notice. For further explanation, see Commons:Hirtle chart as well as a detailed definition of "publication" for public art. Note that it may still be copyrighted in jurisdictions that do not apply the rule of the shorter term for US works (depending on the date of the author's death), such as Canada (50 p.m.a.), Mainland China (50 p.m.a., not Hong Kong or Macao), Germany (70 p.m.a.), Mexico (100 p.m.a.), Switzerland (70 p.m.a.), and other countries with individual treaties.


العربية ∙ беларуская (тарашкевіца) ∙ čeština ∙ Deutsch ∙ Ελληνικά ∙ English ∙ español ∙ فارسی ∙ français ∙ Bahasa Indonesia ∙ italiano ∙ 日本語 ∙ 한국어 ∙ македонски ∙ Nederlands ∙ português ∙ русский ∙ sicilianu ∙ slovenščina ∙ ไทย ∙ Tiếng Việt ∙ 中文（简体） ∙ 中文（繁體） ∙ +/−


Flag of the United States
 



Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse







This UK artistic or literary work, of which the author is unknown and cannot be ascertained by reasonable enquiry, is in the public domain because it is one of the following:

A photograph, which has never previously been made available to the public (e.g. by publication or display at an exhibition) and which was taken more than 70 years ago (before 1 January 1956); or

A photograph, which was made available to the public (e.g. by publication or display at an exhibition) more than 70 years ago (before 1 January 1956); or

An artistic work other than a photograph (e.g. a painting), or a literary work, which was made available to the public (e.g. by publication or display at an exhibition) more than 70 years ago (before 1 January 1956).

 This tag can be used only when the author cannot be ascertained by reasonable enquiry. If you wish to rely on it, please specify in the image description the research you have carried out to find who the author was. The above is all subject to any overriding publication right which may exist. In practice, publication right will often override the first of the bullet points listed.

Unpublished anonymous paintings remain in copyright until at least 1 January 2040. This tag does not apply to engravings or musical works. More information











File history


Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time.



Date/TimeThumbnailDimensionsUserComment

current17:11, 17 May 2025564 × 817 (40 KB)Star Manatee (talk | contribs)Clearer

16:52, 17 May 2025717 × 1,046 (293 KB)Star Manatee (talk | contribs)Uploaded a work by {{Unknown|author}}. Newspaper did not credit an author and no alternate publication of the same photograph was able to be found by a Google Images search. from https://www.newspapers.com/article/liverpool-daily-post-sir-oswald-mosley/165051865/ with UploadWizard




You cannot overwrite this file.
File usage on Commons


The following page uses this file:


File:Mosley (cropped).jpg



File usage on other wikis

The following other wikis use this file:

Usage on en.wikipedia.org
	
Oswald Mosley
	
User:AbraxasAbominog/sandbox


Usage on incubator.wikimedia.org
	
Wp/isv/Oswald Mosley


Usage on isv.wikipedia.org
	
Oswald Mosley


Usage on mk.wikipedia.org
	
Освалд Мозли


Usage on xmf.wikipedia.org
	
ოსვალდ მოსლი



Metadata

This file contains additional information such as Exif metadata which may have been added by the digital camera, scanner, or software program used to create or digitize it. If the file has been modified from its original state, some details such as the timestamp may not fully reflect those of the original file. The timestamp is only as accurate as the clock in the camera, and it may be completely wrong.

JPEG file commentCompressed by jpeg-recompress

Structured data
Items portrayed in this filedepictsOswald Mosleysource of filefile available on the internetdescribed at URL: https://www.newspapers.com/article/liverpool-daily-post-sir-oswald-mosley/165051865/inception6 November 1934media typeimage/jpeg
Retrieved from "https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Mosley.jpg&oldid=1267217971"
					Category: 
Oswald MosleyHidden categories: 
Template Unknown (author)
Images with extracted images
PD US no notice
PD-US missing SDC copyright status
PD-UK
				
			
			
		
		
			
				
	
 This page was last edited on 25 August 2026, at 14:58.
	
Files are available under licenses specified on their description page. All structured data from the file namespace is available under the Creative Commons CC0 License; all unstructured text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy.


				
	
Privacy policy
	
About Wikimedia Commons
	
Disclaimers
	
Legal & safety contacts
	
Code of Conduct
	
Developers
	
Statistics
	
Cookie statement
	
Mobile view


				
	

	



			
		
	 
 

	
		
			
				

Search
			
		
			
		
			
				
					
						
							
								
								
							
							
						
						Search
					
				
			
		
		
				
						
					
						
						

Toggle the table of contents
						
						
					
						
						
					
						
					
			
				File:Mosley.jpg
			
		
		
			
				


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
		
			
				

Add topic
			
		
			
				
				
			
		
	


	
		
	




