

  
    





























    
    Zimbabwe After the Military Takeover: Prospects for Credible Elections and Human Rights Reforms | Human Rights Watch
    


    

  
  
    
      
    

      
            
        Skip to cookie privacy notice
      
      
        Skip to main content
      
      

                
          
  
  
    
                
    
        
            
        
        
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
        
    
    
        
            
        
    
            
    
      
        
          



  
    
          

                  
            العربية
          
        
      
          

                  
            简中
          
        
      
          

                  
            繁中
          
        
      
          

                
          English
        
        
      
          

                  
            Français
          
        
      
          

                  
            Deutsch
          
        
      
          

                  
            日本語
          
        
      
          

                  
            Português
          
        
      
          

                  
            Русский
          
        
      
          

                  
            Español
          
        
      
              

        
          More languages
          



  
        
  

        
      
      



        
        
          
                          
      
      
        
          Search
          
        
        
          



  
        
  

        
      
    
  
                      
          
                          







        Donate Now
  
                      
        
                      
      
                                  
            

  
    
              
          
                          

                
                  Countries
                
              
                          

                
                  Topics
                
              
                          

                
                  Reports
                
              
                          

                
                  Videos & Photos
                
              
                          

                
                  Impact
                
              
                          

                
                  About
                
              
                          

                
                  Join Us
                
              
                          

                
                  Give Now
                
              
                      
        
                
  

            

          
                              
      
    
  

                                                                                                                                                      
  
    
              
            
    
        
            
        
        
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
        
    
    
        
            
        
    
              
          
            
  
    
      
  Close
      




    
    
    
      
        Search
        
        
  Search
      

  
    
  
  

    
      
    
  
  
    
Primary navigation
      
                      
  Countries
      



    
      
          
                      
  Africa
      



    
      
          
          All Africa
      
  
          African Union
      
  
          Angola
      
  
          Burkina Faso
      
  
          Burundi
      
  
          Cameroon
      
  
          Central African Republic
      
  
          Chad
      
  
          Côte d'Ivoire
      
  
          Democratic Republic of Congo
      
  
          Equatorial Guinea
      
  
          Eritrea
      
  
          Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)
      
  
          Ethiopia
      
  
          Gambia
      
  
          Ghana
      
  
          Guinea
      
  
          Kenya
      
  
          Liberia
      
  
          Malawi
      
  
          Mali
      
  
          Mauritius
      
  
          Mozambique
      
  
          Niger
      
  
          Nigeria
      
  
          Rwanda
      
  
          Senegal
      
  
          Sierra Leone
      
  
          Somalia
      
  
          South Africa
      
  
          South Sudan
      
  
          Sudan
      
  
          Tanzania
      
  
          Uganda
      
  
          Zambia
      
  
          Zimbabwe
      
      
      
  
                      
  Americas
      



    
      
          
          All Americas
      
  
          Argentina
      
  
          Bolivia
      
  
          Brazil
      
  
          Canada
      
  
          Chile
      
  
          Colombia
      
  
          Costa Rica
      
  
          Cuba
      
  
          Dominican Republic
      
  
          Ecuador
      
  
          El Salvador
      
  
          Guatemala
      
  
          Haiti
      
  
          Honduras
      
  
          Jamaica
      
  
          Mexico
      
  
          Nicaragua
      
  
          Panama
      
  
          Paraguay
      
  
          Peru
      
  
          Uruguay
      
  
          Venezuela
      
      
      
  
                      
  Asia
      



    
      
          
          All Asia
      
  
          Afghanistan
      
  
          Australia
      
  
          Bangladesh
      
  
          Bhutan
      
  
          Brunei
      
  
          Cambodia
      
  
          China and Tibet
      
  
          Fiji
      
  
          India
      
  
          Indonesia
      
  
          Japan
      
  
          Laos
      
  
          Malaysia
      
  
          Maldives
      
  
          Myanmar (Burma)
      
  
          Nauru
      
  
          Nepal
      
  
          North Korea
      
  
          Pakistan
      
  
          Papua New Guinea
      
  
          Philippines
      
  
          Singapore
      
  
          South Korea
      
  
          Sri Lanka
      
  
          Taiwan
      
  
          Thailand
      
  
          Timor-Leste
      
  
          Vietnam
      
      
      
  
                      
  Europe/Central Asia
      



    
      
          
          All Europe/Central Asia
      
  
          Albania
      
  
          Armenia
      
  
          Azerbaijan
      
  
          Belarus
      
  
          Belgium
      
  
          Bosnia and Herzegovina
      
  
          Bulgaria
      
  
          Croatia
      
  
          Czech Republic
      
  
          Denmark
      
  
          European Union
      
  
          France
      
  
          Georgia
      
  
          Germany
      
  
          Greece
      
  
          Holy See
      
  
          Hungary
      
  
          Ireland
      
  
          Italy
      
  
          Kazakhstan
      
  
          Kyrgyzstan
      
  
          Latvia
      
  
          Lithuania
      
  
          Netherlands
      
  
          Norway
      
  
          Poland
      
  
          Portugal
      
  
          Romania
      
  
          Russia
      
  
          Serbia/Kosovo
      
  
          Spain
      
  
          Sweden
      
  
          Switzerland
      
  
          Tajikistan
      
  
          Türkiye
      
  
          Turkmenistan
      
  
          Ukraine
      
  
          United Kingdom
      
  
          Uzbekistan
      
      
      
  
                      
  Middle East/North Africa
      



    
      
          
          All Middle East/North Africa
      
  
          Algeria
      
  
          Bahrain
      
  
          Egypt
      
  
          Iran
      
  
          Iraq
      
  
          Israel/Palestine
      
  
          Jordan
      
  
          Kuwait
      
  
          Lebanon
      
  
          Libya
      
  
          Mauritania
      
  
          Morocco/Western Sahara
      
  
          Oman
      
  
          Qatar
      
  
          Saudi Arabia
      
  
          Syria
      
  
          Tunisia
      
  
          United Arab Emirates
      
  
          Yemen
      
      
      
  
                      
  United States
      



    
      
          
          All United States
      
  
          Criminal Justice
      
  
          Democracy
      
  
          Economic Justice
      
  
          Immigrants’ Rights and Border Policy
      
  
          Racial Justice
      
  
          US Foreign Policy
      
      
      
      
      
  
                      
  Topics
      



    
      
          
                      
  Arms
      



    
      
          
          Cluster Munitions
      
  
          Killer Robots
      
  
          Landmines
      
  
          Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas
      
  
          Incendiary Weapons
      
      
      
  
                      
  Children's Rights
      



    
      
          
          Education
      
  
          Attacks on Education
      
  
          Children Separated from Families
      
  
          Children and Armed Conflict
      
  
          Child Labor
      
  
          Youth Justice
      
  
          Migrant and Refugee Children
      
  
          Intersex Children
      
      
      
  
          Crisis and Conflict
      
  
                      
  Disability Rights
      



    
      
          
          Shackling
      
      
      
  
                      
  Economic Justice and Rights
      



    
      
          
          Corporate Accountability
      
  
          Poverty and Inequality
      
      
      
  
                      
  Environment and Human Rights
      



    
      
          
          Climate Change
      
  
          Deforestation
      
  
          Fossil Fuels
      
      
      
  
                      
  Free Speech
      



    
      
          
          Press Freedom
      
  
          Religious Freedom
      
      
      
  
                      
  Health
      



    
      
          
          Sexual and Reproductive Health
      
  
          Detention Centers
      
  
          Disasters and Displaced Populations
      
  
          Environment and Health
      
  
          Health Care Access
      
  
          HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis
      
  
          Palliative Care
      
  
          Attacks on Health
      
      
      
  
          LGBT Rights
      
  
                      
  Refugees and Migrants
      



    
      
          
          Asylum Seekers
      
  
          Internally Displaced People
      
  
          Exploitation, Forced Labor & Trafficking
      
      
      
  
          Rights of Older People
      
  
                      
  International Justice
      



    
      
          
          International Criminal Court
      
  
          Peace and Justice
      
      
      
  
          Sport and Human Rights
      
  
                      
  Technology and Rights
      



    
      
          
          Digital Investigations Lab
      
      
      
  
                      
  Terrorism / Counterterrorism
      



    
      
          
          CIA Activities
      
  
          Detention without Trial
      
  
          Edward Snowden
      
  
          Guantanamo
      
  
          Guantanamo - Military Commissions
      
  
          Targeted Killings and Drones
      
      
      
  
          Torture
      
  
                      
  United Nations
      



    
      
          
          Human Rights Council
      
      
      
  
                      
  Women's Rights
      



    
      
          
          Forced Marriage
      
  
          Gender Based Violence
      
  
          Domestic Workers
      
  
          Gender Equality
      
  
          Reproductive Rights
      
  
          Sexual Violence
      
  
          Labor Rights
      
  
          Sex Work
      
  
          Women and Armed Conflict
      
  
          Women’s Health
      
      
      
      
      
  
          Reports
      
  
          Video & Photos
      
  
          Impact
      
  
                      
  Join Us
      



    
      
          
          Newsletters
      
  
          Our Committees
      
  
          Film Festival
      
  
          Legacies for Justice
      
      
      
  
                      
  About
      



    
      
          
                      
  About Us
      



    
      
          
          History
      
      
      
  
          Newsletters
      
  
          Careers
      
  
                      
  People
      



    
      
          
          Board of Directors
      
  
          Advisory Committees
      
      
      
  
          Social Media
      
  
          Human Rights Education
      
  
                      
  Partners
      



    
      
          
          Partner Resources
      
      
      
  
          Financials and Fundraising Policy
      
  
          Accessibility
      
  
          Contact
      
      
      
  
                      
  Give Now
      



    
      
          
          Make a One-time Gift
      
  
          Give Monthly
      
  
          Gifts in Wills and Trusts
      
  
          Matching Gifts
      
  
          Partners for Justice
      
  
          Stock or Wire Transfer
      
  
          Give from Your IRA
      
      
      
  
  
                        
  
Donate Now
                  

        
    
      
        Search
        
        
  Search
      

  
    
  
  

    
      
    
    
    
      
          English
                        
  
    Choose your language
    
  Close
      




    
  
  
                                            العربية
                              简中
                              繁中
                              English
                              Français
                              Deutsch
                              日本語
                              Português
                              Русский
                              Español
                                    
  
                          
                More Languages
              
                      

      
    
          
  
Donate Now
        
      
  Open the main menu
      
    
    
    

    
    
  
    
    Trending
          Trump Administration and Human Rights 
          Russia-Ukraine War 
          Israel/Palestine 
          International Criminal Court 
          Crisis in the Middle East 
      

              

          
    
          
    




          
  
    
      



  

    
      Would you like to see a version of this page that loads faster by showing text only?
    

    
      
          Yes
        
        No, don't ask again
          

    
      ✕ Close
    

  



  

      
  

    
      
    
  
    
      




  
  
    
      
        Human Rights Watch
      
    
    
                    
          

                          Zimbabwe After the Military Takeover: Prospects for Credible Elections and Human Rights Reforms

                      
        
            
                                  
            
              
                Print
                



  
        
  

              
            
          
                                  
                          







        Donate Now
  
                      
              
    
  



  
      




  
        
                  
            
  
    
      


  
    
      December 12, 2017 2:00PM EST
              |
        Statement
          
          





      

  
    Zimbabwe After the Military Takeover: Prospects for Credible Elections and Human Rights Reforms
    
Testimony of Dewa Mavhinga Before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, December 12, 2017 
  

              
      
      
          

      Share this via Bluesky
  





      Share this via Facebook
  



      Share this via X
  





      Share this via WhatsApp
  



      Share this via Email
  



      More sharing options
  



      Share this via LinkedIn
  



      Share this via Reddit
  



      Share this via Telegram
  



      Share this via Printer
  




    


  



  
    
      
  

          
        
            
    


    
  
  




                          







  
          
        


  
    
      


      
      
Introduction


Thank you, Chairman Flake, Ranking Member Booker, and other members of this subcommittee for giving me the opportunity to testify on behalf of Human Rights Watch at this hearing on Zimbabwe. I would like to request that my statement in its entirety be submitted for the record.


My name is Dewa Mavhinga. I am Southern Africa director in the Africa Division of Human Rights Watch where I lead, among other duties, our human rights investigation work on Zimbabwe. I frequently travel to Zimbabwe and last month I was in Harare when the military takeover occurred on November 15, 2017. I have met with leaders of the main political parties, private media, and key civil society groups to assess human rights conditions since the military takeover and ahead of national elections scheduled for 2018. A Zimbabwean national myself, I maintain daily contact with local activists, and religious and business leaders in the country who regularly update me on the situation there.


Mr. Chairman, my testimony will first lay out the human rights situation in Zimbabwe since the military takeover of government functions on November 15, and then highlight key recommendations to the US government for action to press the new Zimbabwean government to ensure a rights-respecting environment leading to democratic, credible, transparent and peaceful elections and political stability thereafter.


I. Current Human Rights Situation


The Military Takeover and Mugabe Ouster 


Following the military takeover, Robert Mugabe resigned as president on November 21 after 37 years of authoritarian rule marred by countless serious human rights violations. On November 24, Mugabe was replaced by his former deputy, Emmerson Mnangagwa, who has his own long record of rights violations. In his inaugural speech, Mnangagwa confirmed that elections will take place by August 2018 as scheduled, but he did not address critical issues, notably the security sector, media, and electoral reforms necessary to ensure credible, free, and fair elections. There has been no indication that the Mnangagwa administration intends to ensure the independence and enhance the professionalism of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC).


As reports of abuses by the military since the takeover began to emerge, the excitement and euphoria that many Zimbabweans greeted the end of Mugabe’s rule quickly fizzled out to be replaced by uneasiness and uncertainty. Allegations are rife that between November 14 and 24, the army arrested and detained a number of Mugabe’s associates without providing information about the arrests, or places and conditions of detention. Since the military takeover, soldiers have not returned to the barracks, but instead are now involved in policing the streets. This is the same military that has been credibly implicated in rights violations against the general population during the Mugabe years. Mugabe openly encouraged partisanship of the military as a tool for maintaining his grip on power. The new president, Mnangagwa, assumed office with military backing, and appointed two army generals to cabinet, Air Marshal Perence Shiri, and Maj. Gen. Sibusiso Moyo.  This raised concerns about Mnangagwa’s independence from the armed forces, suggests further entrenchment of the military in civilian affairs.


Legalization of Military Involvement in National Politics 


On November 24, High Court Judge George Chiweshe ruled that the military intervention that led to Mugabe’s ouster was lawful under Zimbabwe’s constitution. Whatever the merits of the ruling, the judgment could embolden the military to carry out further incursions in Zimbabwe’s political or electoral affairs in the future. The highly partisan stance of Zimbabwe’s military leadership, particularly without meaningful security sector reforms, significantly reduce the chances that free, fair and credible elections can be held.


The military has a long history of partisanship with the ruling party, ZANU-PF, interfering in the nation’s political and electoral affairs in ways that adversely affected the ability of citizens to vote freely. The partisanship of the security forces’ leadership has translated into abuses by these forces against civil society activists, journalists, and members and supporters of the opposition political party, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC).


There is an urgent need, ahead of the elections, for Zimbabwe’s Constitutional Court to review Judge Chiweshe’s ruling, and ensure that members of the security forces observe strict political neutrality. Failure to ensure a professional, independent and non-partisan role for the security forces may make it difficult to deliver the elections needed to put Zimbabwe on a democratic and rights-respecting track.


Zimbabwe’s Re-engagement with the International Community


Following the military takeover, the leadership of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) called on all stakeholders in Zimbabwe to peacefully resolve the nation’s political challenges. SADC leaders also welcomed Mugabe’s decision to resign, pledging to support the 2018 elections.


While the African Union initially condemned the military takeover, the regional body later welcomed Mugabe’s resignation. The AU said it recognized that the Zimbabwean people have expressed their will that there should be a peaceful transfer of power and Mugabe’s decision to resign paved the way for a transition process, owned and led by the people of Zimbabwe.


The AU and SADC have yet, however, to address the need for the new administration to design a roadmap for democratic elections and the political neutrality and non-interference of the security forces in civilian and electoral affairs of the country.


In early December, the European Union ambassador to Zimbabwe, Phillipe van Damme, said the EU will not provide significant new funding to Zimbabwe until the country holds free, fair, and credible elections.


Human Rights Watch is of the view that full re-engagement with the Zimbabwean government should be based on a firm commitment from the interim administration in Harare that they will institute measures that will ensure tangible and long overdue democratic and electoral reforms. A key benchmark for increased US government engagement should be an independent assessment of the environment in which the 2018 elections are conducted and the transfer of power to an elected civilian government. It is important now that the military leadership publicly announce its commitment to credible, free and fair elections and that it respects the outcome of the elections.


Accountability and Justice for Past Abuses


Mnangagwa’s government should be encouraged through public statements to demonstrate commitment to accountability, justice for human rights abuses, and respect for the rule of law in Zimbabwe. We believe that Mnangagwa’s recent calls to “let bygones be bygones” should not extend to serious human rights violations since 1980, many of which implicate the military. The first post-independence overt military involvement in Zimbabwe’s political affairs was during the period from 1982 to 1987 when the government deployed a section of the army, the Fifth Brigade, ostensibly to quell a military mutiny in the Midlands and Matabeleland provinces. The Fifth Brigade carried out widespread abuses including torture and unlawful killing of an estimated 20,000 people. In 1988 the government granted amnesty to all those involved in human rights violations committed between 1982 and 1987.


The military has also interfered in the nation’s political and electoral affairs in ways that adversely affected the ability of Zimbabwean citizens to vote freely, particularly during the 2008 elections when the army engaged in numerous systematic abuses including political violence, torture, and arson targeting political opponents. That violence resulted in the killing of more than 200 people, the beating and torture of 5,000 more, and the displacement of about 36,000 people. ZANU-PF-affiliated military leaders who were implicated in the violence and abuses were never held to account. The military’s historical record should not go unnoticed as Zimbabwe prepares for another election.


 In October 2008, soldiers killed more than 200 people and committed other serious human rights abuses in Chiadzwa, a village in Marange district, eastern Zimbabwe, and violently seized control of the district’s diamond fields. Human Rights Watch investigations showed that between 2008 and 2014 the government rotated army brigades into Marange to ensure that different brigades had an opportunity to benefit from the diamond trade. Soldiers harassed and threatened miners and other civilians into forming syndicates so that the soldiers could control diamond mining and trade in Marange.


Independence of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission


Currently, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission’s secretariat – which is charged with overseeing the 2018 election process – is dominated by partisan state intelligence and military officials. Electoral reforms should start with making the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission independent and professional. The commission is compiling a new voters’ register. Unlike countries like Botswana or Mozambique that guarantee the diaspora vote, there is no provision for Zimbabwean citizens in the diaspora to vote from outside the country, unless in diplomatic missions. In early December, the chairperson of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission, Justice Rita Makarau, resigned from her post without stating reasons. Mnangagwa will replace Makarau with a former judge or a person qualified to be a judge. A key part of Zimbabwe’s election credibility rests on ensuring that the chairperson is replaced by someone known to be independent, impartial, non-partisan and with the capacity to deliver a democratic election. If Makarau is replaced by a person aligned to the military, and lacking in independence and professionalism, a credible election will not be possible. 


Restrictions on Rights to Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly


The Mnangagwa government should also take steps to amend or repeal repressive laws such as the Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA), the Public Order and Security Act (POSA), and the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act. These laws were used under Mugabe to severely curtail basic rights through vague defamation clauses and draconian penalties. Partisan policing and prosecution has worsened the impact of the repressive provisions in the AIPPA and POSA laws. Failure to repeal or significantly revise these laws and to develop mechanisms to address the partisan conduct of the police leaves little chance of the full enjoyment of rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly prior to and during the coming elections.


II. Key Recommendations to the US Government 


Historically, the US government has shown a strong interest in promoting respect for the rule of law, good governance and human rights in Africa. The Trump administration has yet to demonstrate leadership on human rights issues in Africa so it is more important than ever that Congress promotes human rights as a core pillar of US foreign policy. To that end, Congress should support the people of Zimbabwe by calling on the Mnangagwa government to set and implement a clear roadmap for democratic elections.


 Specifically, Human Rights Watch urges Congress to:


Maintain existing US policy toward Zimbabwe until the military removes itself from politics and the 2018 elections are legitimately assessed to be peaceful, transparent, free and fair and that power is smoothly transmitted to the newly elected government.
	
Press, through public statements and support to nongovernmental organizations in Zimbabwe, for accountability and justice for past serious abuses and respect for the rule of law.
	
Urge the Trump administration to make Zimbabwe’s transition a priority in the region and to work closely with SADC to press Zimbabwe’s political leadership to:
		
ensure the political neutrality of the security forces;
			
impartially investigate and appropriately prosecute alleged abuses by military personnel;
			
provide for the timely and sufficient deployment of domestic and SADC-led international election observers to Zimbabwe to promote credible, free and fair elections, and maintain such monitors for a suitable period after the elections to deter violence and intimidation; and
			
ensure the repeal or amendment of repressive sections of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act, the Public Order and Security Act, and the Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act.
		
	
Provide direct financial and technical support to the government that comes to power through credible, free and fair elections that is committed to strengthening democratic state institutions and promoting the rule of law, good governance, and human rights.

Mr. Chairman, my sincere thanks once again for the opportunity to address this subcommittee. I am happy to respond to any questions you or your colleagues may have. 

    
    


  


  
    

            



      

	
    
      
        
Every piece on our website is resource intensive. If you donate whatever you can today, we will use it to continue investigating abuses and advocate for change in 100+ countries.
        
          
                      
                    
                          
                

  
  $15
  
  
              
                          
                

  
  $35
  
  
              
                          
                

  
  $60
  
  
              
                          
                

  
  $100
  
  
              
                          
                

  
  $150
  
  
              
                        
              

  
  Other
                    $
                  
                
            
          
          
            




    


        Donate Now
  
          
        
      
    
	

  

      




  
    
      

      


  

      
      Region / Country
      
                  
Africa                  
Zimbabwe                  
US Foreign Policy              
    
  


  

  
    
      


  






      



  

    More Reading
  
  
    
    
              

  








      
    
                        October 1, 2026
                            
          Dispatches
        
          
    

              A Long Road to Justice in the Central African Republic

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

  








      
    
                        October 1, 2026
                            
          Dispatches
        
          
    

              Mauritius Rights Body Calls for Marriage Equality

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

          
  



  

  
    
      


  






      



  

    Reports
  
  
    
    
              

    









      
    
                        June 24, 2026
                            
          Report
        
          
    

              “I Live in Constant Peril”

          
          
Discrimination, Lack of Economic Autonomy and Violence Against Women in Cameroon
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

    









      
    
                        June 12, 2026
                            
          Report
        
          
    

              “I Just Want to Work Without Fear”

          
          
Discrimination and Violations of the Right to Work for Persons with Albinism in Malawi
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

          
  



  

      
      
  
          
        
  
    
      


  






      



  

    More Reading
  
  
    
    
              

  








      
    
                        October 1, 2026
                            
          Dispatches
        
          
    

              A Long Road to Justice in the Central African Republic

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

  








      
    
                        October 1, 2026
                            
          Dispatches
        
          
    

              Mauritius Rights Body Calls for Marriage Equality

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

          
  



  

  
      



  

    Most Viewed
  
  
    
      

  
  
  

  
  
  

  



  
    
              

  









      
    
                        October 5, 2026
                            
          Dispatches
        
          
    

              Bangladeshi Police Round Up Opposition Supporters

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

  









      
    
                        October 5, 2026
                            
          Dispatches
        
          
    

              Christa Pike’s Suffering Highlights Inhumanity of Death Penalty  

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

  









      
    
                        June 14, 2018
                            
          News Release
        
          
    

              Africa: Pregnant Girls, Young Mothers Barred from School  

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

  









      
    
                        October 5, 2026
                            
          Report
        
          
    

              Iraq: Dire Prospects for Alleged ISIS-Linked Men, Boys

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

              

  









      
    
                        September 8, 2016
                            
          News Release
        
          
    

              Nepal: Child Marriage Threatens Girls’ Futures

          
                              
        

        
                                    
      
                              
              
            
  
  

          
  


    

  
  

  
  



  

      
      


      
    

    

    

      Share this via Bluesky
  





      Share this via Facebook
  



      Share this via X
  





      Share this via WhatsApp
  



      Share this via Email
  



      More sharing options
  



      Share this via LinkedIn
  



      Share this via Reddit
  



      Share this via Telegram
  



      Share this via Printer
  




  


  

  

            
    

  
    

                    


  





            
      
                  
Protecting Rights, Saving Lives
          
Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in close to 100 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice


                      

      
                  
            
              Donate Now
            
          
              
    
      
  


            


  
    
      


  
  
          
Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement today.
              
        
          Enter an email address
          

                    
            Leave blank
            
            Leave blank
            
            Leave blank
            
            
          

          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
        
        Processing..
          
        
        Thank you for signing up!
        An error occurred while subscribing your email address. Please try again.
      
      
  
    



  
        
  

  



  

  

      


              
    

    
    
      
        
                      
      Get Updates On Rights Issues Worldwide
    
    
      

            
        Leave blank
        
        Leave blank
        
        Leave blank
        
        
      

      




    


        Sign Up
  
      
      
              
            
      
      
      
    
  

                  
        
                      

    
Connect With Us
    
    
                                        

            








          BlueSky
      



  
        
  


          
                                 

            








          X
      



  
        
  


          
                                 

            








          Facebook
      



  
        
  


          
                                 

            








          YouTube
      



  
        
  


          
                                 

            








          Instagram
      



  
        
  


          
                                                

            








          LinkedIn
      



  
        
  


          
                                 

            








          TikTok
      



  
        
  


          
                  
  

                  
      
      
        
          
                                      
  
Footer menu
  

        


  

        Contact Us
      

        Corrections
      

        Privacy Policy
      

        Permissions
      

        Site Map
      

        Child Safeguarding
      

        Text Version
      


                        
          © 2026 Human Rights Watch
        

        
          
            Human Rights Watch | 1441 Broadway, 14th Floor | New York, NY 10018 USA | t 1.212.290.4700
          
          
            
Human Rights Watch  is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808
          
        
      
    
    
      
        Human Rights Watch
      
    
  

    
  

      

  

    

    


  

