



Thomas Rousseau - Wikipedia































Jump to content

	
		
			
				

	
	

Main menu
	
	


				
		

	
	Main menu
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Navigation
	
	
		
		
			
			
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
		
		
	


	

	
		Contribute
	
	
		
		
			
			
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Special pages
		
		
	




				

	


		
			

	
	
		
		
	


		
		
			

	

Search
	
	
		
			
				
					
						
						
					
					
				
				Search
			
		
	


			
	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	
		

	
	

Appearance
	
	


			
				
			
		
	


	
	

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


	

	
		
		
			
Donate


Create account


Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	

	
	

Personal tools
	
	


		

	
		
		
			


Donate




Create account




Log in


			
		
		
	


	
	




		
	


	
		
			
		
		
			
		
			
				
				
				
		
		
	
	
				
					
					
	
	
Contents
	move to sidebar
	hide



	
		

			
				(Top)
			
		
		

		
			
				1
				Early life
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				2
				Political activities
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				3
				Views
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				4
				Notes
			
		
		
		
		
	
	

		
			
				5
				References
			
		
		
		
		
	



					
		
			
		
		
			
				
					
						

	
	

Toggle the table of contents
	
	


							
			
		
	


					
					Thomas Rousseau
			

	
	

Add languages
	
	

		
			
			
				
				
			
			Add links
		

	


				
					
						
							
								

	
		
		
			
Article


Talk


			
		
		
	


								

	
	English
	
	


					

	
		
		
			
			
		
		
	


				
	


							
						
						
							
			    

	
		
		
			
Read


Edit


View history


			
		
		
	


			

							
								

	
	

Tools
	
	


									
						

	
	Tools
	move to sidebar
	hide


	

	
		Actions
	
	
		
		
			


Read




Edit




View history


			
		
		
	



	
		General
	
	
		
		
			
			
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Switch to legacy parser
		
		
	



	
		Print/export
	
	
		
		
			
			
Download as PDF
Printable version
		
		
	



	
		In other projects
	
	
		
		
			
			
Wikimedia Commons
Wikidata item
		
		
	




									
				
	


							
						
					
				
				
					
						
							
				
							
		
						
							
				
	
	Appearance
	move to sidebar
	hide





							
		
					
				
				
					
							
		

						From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
						
						
					
					
					American far-right activist (born 1998)




Thomas Rousseau
Rousseau in 2025

Leader of Patriot Front
Incumbent
Assumed office August 2017
Preceded byPosition established


Personal details
BornThomas Ryan Rousseau (1998-10-20) October 20, 1998 (age 27)Grapevine, Texas, U.S.
OccupationFar-right, neo-fascist activist
Known forFounder and leader of Patriot Front, right-wing activism


Thomas Ryan Rousseau (born October 20, 1998) is an American far-right activist known for founding and leading the neo-fascist and white supremacist group Patriot Front. The group, according to its manifesto, aims to create a white ethnostate.[1]


Early life[edit]

Rousseau is a resident of Grapevine, Texas, located between Dallas and Fort Worth, and attended Coppell High School.[2][3] According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, Rousseau was a graphics editor of his high school newspaper, The Sidekick, where he wrote columns calling for banning transgender bathrooms and promoting guns on college campuses.[4] Rousseau was a Boy Scout.[5] He has also been on an FBI watchlist since he was in high school.[6][7] In an interview with ProPublica, Rousseau's classmates said, "He seemed Republican, but he didn't seem crazy", and most people who knew Rousseau personally in Grapevine expressed surprise that he founded and leads a white supremacist group.[8]


Political activities[edit]


Rousseau founded Patriot Front in the wake of the 2017 Unite the Right rally.[3] Rousseau attended the rally as the leader of Vanguard America (VA)'s contingent, a group he joined as a teenager.[9]


In the weeks before the rally, Rousseau took control of Vanguard America's website and Discord server[a] after feuding with the "Commander" of VA, Dillon Irizarry.[10] As Irizarry suffered from the fallout from the rally, Rousseau used the website and Discord server to launch a new group, Patriot Front, appealing to VA members in a Discord message: "Vanguard America, as you know it, will now be the 'Patriots Front', and that the focus and goals of the group would remain the same", however, VA and Irizarry continued to operate.[11] Despite participating in the rally, Rousseau has since denounced it as "bad activism" that damaged the far-right cause in the United States.[8] On August 14, 2017, the VA Twitter account announced that Rousseau was no longer affiliated with the group.[2] An aftereffect of Rousseau's feud with Irizarry is his refusal to use any formal title as the Patriot Front leader, rejecting the term "Commander", which had been used by VA.[8] This is despite Rousseau adopting the position of "Vice-Commander" while he was in VA.[12] Patriot Front's core was the "Southern Front", a regional section of the VA, and it was intended from the start to be a more strategic, savvy, careful alternative, adopting American symbols such as red, white, and blue, the bald eagle, and patriotic language.[8] Rousseau has gained notability for being the only major figure in Patriot Front to reveal his identity.[9]


On August 2, 2020, Rousseau and two Patriot Front members disguised as Antifa-affiliated individuals were arrested for placing stickers on and around the county courthouse in Parker County, Texas. All members admitted to the crime.[13]


In 2021, Rousseau attended a conference with Jared Taylor of American Renaissance, a white supremacist website and magazine.[14]


In 2021, Rousseau was the subject of a civil suit by the State of Virginia due to Patriot Front's defacing of a statue of African-American tennis player Arthur Ashe, which Rousseau never challenged, resulting in a default judgment pending for vandalism, should he ever set foot in Virginia again.[15]


In 2023, Rousseau would be named in a lawsuit by African-American singer Charles M. Murrell III for "physical and emotional challenges" stemming from what he claimed was an assault carried out by Patriot Front members during their 2018 march through Boston.[3] Murrell would be represented by Human Rights First, the group that sued the organizers of Unite the Right for violence at their rally.[3]


In 2023, Rousseau and 30 other members of Patriot Front were arrested in Coeur d'Alene, Kootenai County, Idaho, for plotting a riot at a pride parade; however, the charges against Rousseau were dropped mostly due to the length of the case and the fact the prosecution lost evidence as the group's phones had been seized before there was a warrant out for their arrests.[16][17][18][19] Another key reason Rousseau's case was dropped was because his lawyer was able to convince the judge the lead prosecutor was unprofessional, "self-congratulatory", and "braggadocious," while some judges[b] had ruled the police did not have probable cause for the arrest in the first place.[20] The prosecution handled the case so poorly that one of the judges went on record stating, "I have never, in my 10 years, seen anything that even approaches this level of failure to properly disclose evidence", as the prosecution failed to properly document objections, and fed evidence in "drips and drabs."[20] After the case was dropped, Rousseau held a rally in New York City where he said, "We're going to keep doing demonstrations. We're going to keep making ourselves known."[20]


In a 2024 vandalism case in North Dakota, Rousseau denied that Patriot Front was a far-right or white supremacist organization and claimed that "Patriot Front engages in activism through lawful political activism consistent with its First Amendment right."[21] North Dakota U.S. District Judge Peter Welte dismissed two parts of the lawsuit against Rousseau, which was filed by 10 unnamed individuals for vandalizing an immigrant bus station's mural, rejecting parts of the suit including the plaintiffs' rights to celebrate multiculturalism and diversity, as well as Rousseau's alleged trespassing with intentions to destroy the mural, but kept The Ku Klux Klan Act violations and civil conspiracy allegations on the table.[21]


In February 2024, Rousseau was booked into the McLennan County Jail in Waco, Texas, for a felony charge in Virginia where Rousseau was "burning an object to intimidate"—namely, for carrying a Tiki torch at the Unite the Right rally.[15] The state of Virginia is seeking his extradition as the felony carries the potential sentence of 5 years in prison, while Rousseau and Patriot Front have denounced the charges as fabricated.[15] His extradition would also allow the default judgment for his earlier vandalism case to go through.[15]


Views[edit]
Rousseau at the DC March for Life rally in January 2025

Rousseau believes that Donald Trump is a white supremacist in line with the values of Patriot Front however he only "indirectly supports" people like Rousseau.[5]


Rousseau stated that his group has found it easy to recruit on college campuses and that "colleges are porous, easy to access, full of our target demographic."[5]


Rousseau claims that "[White people are] being relentlessly erased on all sides, by the Jew, by non-whites who hate us."[5]


Rousseau has espoused anti-Zionist views, stating he wants to combat "foreign-influence" in the US government.[22]


Rousseau has frequently denounced calls to violence, even within his own organization, with one Patriot Front infiltrator saying that Rousseau's biggest fear is a member of the group committing an act of terrible violence as that would "end the group."[8] Vanguard America had become "radioactive" due to the Charlottesville car attack being perpetrated by one of its members.[2][failed verification]


Rousseau is also a strong supporter of anonymity, despite his own openness about his identity, mandating all members of Patriot Front be anonymous and refusing to divulge any details about the group or its inner workings and goals.[8]


Notes[edit]


↑ The primary form of communication for VA's membership and leadership[2]

↑ At any given point, the case against the 31 Patriot Front members had up to nine different judges and the defendants had been tried individually, then as a group, and then individually again.[20]



References[edit]


↑ "Mapping the Communication Network Inside Patriot Front". Southern Poverty Law Center. March 17, 2026. Retrieved July 15, 2026.

1 2 3 4 "Thomas Rousseau". Southern Poverty Law Center. Retrieved December 26, 2024.

1 2 3 4 Williams, Michael (August 8, 2023). "Texas extremist group Patriot Front sued over Boston attack of Black man". The Dallas Morning News. Retrieved December 24, 2024.

↑ Wakefield, Lily (June 14, 2022). "Leader of white supremacist neo-Nazi group Patriot Front among 31 arrested at Idaho Pride". PinkNews. Retrieved December 25, 2024.

1 2 3 4 Whisted, Haleigh (April 2, 2020). "With rise of Trump came rise of white nationalism, critics say". Capital News Service. Retrieved December 25, 2024.

↑ Ward, Whitney (August 29, 2022). "Who is Thomas Rousseau? Meet the leader of Patriot Front". KREM (TV). Retrieved December 26, 2024.

↑ Bernd, Candice; Buckley, Jordan (January 29, 2018). "Nazis Go To School". The Texas Observer. Retrieved January 3, 2025.

1 2 3 4 5 6 Schaeffer, Carol; Zimmermann, Fritz (November 8, 2019). "They Are Racist; Some of Them Have Guns. Inside the White Supremacist Group Hiding in Plain Sight". ProPublica. Retrieved December 26, 2024.

1 2 Monacelli, Steven (July 10, 2023). "Homegrown Neo-Fascist Movement Marches in Austin". The Texas Observer. Retrieved December 25, 2024.

↑ "Patriot Front". ADL. Archived from the original on December 17, 2024. Retrieved January 2, 2025.

↑ Rousseau, Thomas. "Message from @Thomas Ryan". Discord Leaks. Unicorn Riot. Archived from the original on December 28, 2024. Retrieved December 28, 2024.

↑ Swaine, Jon; Beckett, Lois (August 14, 2017). "Leader of neo-Nazi group linked to Charlottesville attack was a US marine". The Guardian. Retrieved January 28, 2025.

↑ Texas, Eric Griffey (August 5, 2020). "White Supremacists Arrested In Weatherford". spectrumlocalnews.com. Retrieved July 7, 2026.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

↑ Williams, Phil (December 2, 2024). "Inside the influential white-supremacist conference that calls Tennessee 'home away from home'". WTVF. Retrieved December 24, 2024.

1 2 3 4 Dickinson, Tim (February 26, 2024). "Patriot Front Leader Booked on Intimidation Charges Linked to Charlottesville". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 26, 2024.

↑ BOONE, REBECCA (June 14, 2022). "Experts: Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric could galvanize extremists". WETM-TV. Associated Press. Retrieved December 25, 2024.

↑ King, Matthew (November 24, 2023). "Judge dismisses charges against Patriot Front founder". KREM (TV). Retrieved December 25, 2024.

↑ Cabeza, Garrett (November 23, 2023). "Judge dismisses conspiracy to riot charge against Patriot Front founder, prosecutors appeal". The Spokesman-Review. Retrieved December 25, 2024.

↑ "Leader of white supremacist group among those arrested near Idaho Pride event". CBC. Associated Press. Retrieved December 26, 2024.

1 2 3 4 Walters, Daniel (February 12, 2024). "How North Idaho prosecutors lost the case against Patriot Front's white nationalist leader". Idaho Capital Sun. Retrieved December 26, 2024.

1 2 Baumgarten, April (October 7, 2024). "Patriot Front leaders ask for Fargo vandalism lawsuit to be dismissed". Grand Forks Herald. Retrieved December 26, 2024.

↑ "Patriot Front | ADL". www.adl.org. Retrieved June 30, 2026.




v
t
eAlt-right
Ideas
Main

American Nationalism

Fourteen Words

White ethnostate

White supremacy

Cultural Marxism

Pizzagate

White genocide

Related

Alt-lite

Alt-right pipeline

Boogaloo movement

DezNat

Identitarian movement

Incel

Manosphere

Men Going Their Own Way

Neo-nationalism

Paleolibertarianism

QAnon

Radical right

Dark Enlightenment

Proud Boys

Onlineculture
Alt-tech

4chan

/pol/

8chan

BitChute

Epik

Gab

Gettr

Minds

Parler

Rumble

Truth Social

Voat (defunct)

Websites

American Renaissance

Breitbart News

The Daily Stormer

Evie Magazine

Infowars

Kuruc.info

Metapedia

Occidental Observer

The Occidental Quarterly

Rebel News

Red Ice

Reddit (r/The_Donald)

The Right Stuff

StoneToss

TruNews

Vanguard News Network

VDARE

WorldNetDaily

Memes

"Basket of deplorables"

"Beta male"

"Cuckservative"

Happy Merchant

"It's okay to be white"

Moon Man

NPC

OK gesture

"Owning the libs"

Pepe the Frog

"Red pill and blue pill"

"Remove Kebab"

"Shadilay"

"Snowflake"

"Social justice warrior"

Trash Doves

Triple parentheses

Undercut

Media

Angry Goy II

Groups

AltRight Corporation

American Freedom Party

Anti-Communist Action

The Base

Deplorable Pride

Diagolon

Groypers

Hundred-Handers

Identity Evropa (defunct)

Les Identitaires

National Policy Institute

Patriot Front

Patriot Prayer

Rise Above Movement

Traditionalist Worker Party (defunct)

Trads

Vanguard America

Washington Summit Publishers

Events
Incidents

Berkeley protests

Comicsgate

DeploraBall

End Domestic Terrorism rally

Gamergate

Macron e-mail leaks

Unite the Right rally

Unite the Right 2

Attacks

Assault of DeAndre Harris

Charlottesville car attack

Christchurch mosque shootings

Murder of Timothy Caughman

Portland train attack

Lists

Timeline of activities involving the Proud Boys

People

James Allsup

Andrew Anglin

Andrew "weev" Auernheimer

Steve Bannon

Theodore "Vox Day" Beale

Carl "Sargon of Akkad" Benjamin

Owen Benjamin

Peter Brimelow

Christopher Cantwell

Mike Cernovich

Alain de Benoist

John Derbyshire

Jack Donovan

Mike Enoch

Guillaume Faye

Haakon Forwald

Daniel Friberg

Nick Fuentes

Jean-François Gariépy

Ben Garrison

Austin "Augustus Sol Invictus" Gillespie

Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet

Faith Goldy

Paul Gottfried

Matthew Heimbach

Sam Hyde

Dillon Irizarry

Charles C. Johnson

Greg Johnson

William Daniel Johnson

Alex Jones

Jason Jorjani

Tom Kawcyznski

Jason Kessler

Steve King

Elliott Kline

Nick Land

Lana Lokteff

Laura Loomer

Norman Lowell

Kevin MacDonald

Jeremy MacKenzie

Stephen McNallen

Merlin Miller

Stefan Molyneux

Paul Nehlen

Paul "GypsyCrusader" Nicholas Miller

Ethan Nordean

Jack Posobiec

Bronze Age Pervert

Paul Ray Ramsey

William Regnery II

Colin "Millennial Woes" Robertson

Thomas Rousseau

Martin Sellner

Lauren Southern

Richard B. Spencer

Brett Stevens

Jared Taylor

Tila Tequila

Daryush "Roosh V" Valizadeh

Paul Joseph Watson

Lucian Wintrich

Curtis Yarvin

Milo Yiannopoulos

Oppositionandcriticism
People

Ian "Innuendo Studios" Danskin

Robert Evans

Daryle Lamont Jenkins

Media

Alt-America

Culture Warlords

Devil's Bargain

Feels Good Man

I Don't Speak German

It Came from Something Awful

Kill All Normies

Knowledge Fight

White Right: Meeting the Enemy



v
t
eUnite the Right
Participants

James Allsup

Christopher Cantwell

Peter Cvjetanovic

Matthew Heimbach

Michael Hill

Augustus Sol Invictus

Dillon Irizarry[a]

Jason Kessler

Elliot Kline

Patrick Little

Thomas Rousseau

Richard B. Spencer

Teddy Joseph Von Nukem

Attacks

Assault of DeAndre Harris

Charlottesville car attack

Related

A Concert for Charlottesville

Molly Conger

Sines v. Kessler

Unite the Right 2

White Right: Meeting the Enemy



↑ Irizarry was one of the coordinators, although he was unable to participate due to a family emergency


















Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Rousseau&oldid=1375105927"
					Categories: 
1998 births
American founders
American white nationalists
Living people
American neo-fascists
Activists from TexasHidden categories: 
Articles with short description
Short description is different from Wikidata
Use American English from February 2026
All Wikipedia articles written in American English
Use mdy dates from December 2024
Pages using multiple image with zero images
CS1 maint: url-status
All articles with failed verification
Articles with failed verification from February 2025
				
			
			
		
		
			
				
	
 This page was last edited on 15 September 2026, at 22:26 (UTC).
	
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
	
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


				
	
Privacy policy
	
About Wikipedia
	
Disclaimers
	
Contact Wikipedia
	
Legal & safety contacts
	
Code of Conduct
	
Developers
	
Statistics
	
Cookie statement
	
Mobile view


				
	

	



			
		
	 
 

	
		
			
				

Search
			
		
			
		
			
				
					
						
							
								
								
							
							
						
						Search
					
				
			
		
		
				
						
					
						
						

Toggle the table of contents
						
						
					
						
						
					
						
					
			
				Thomas Rousseau
			
		
		
			
				


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
			


			
		
			
				

Add languages
			
			

Add topic
			
		
			
				
				
			
		
	


	
		
	




